 

 
 

   

   

SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

Safety Alert No. 347 
8 March 2019 

 

 
       

 
            

                      
 

 

Contact: Jason Mathews 
Phone:  (504) 731-1496 

Dropped Riser Joint Nearly Crushes Floorhand 

          
            Drilling riser being lifted with hydraulic running tool                                 Riser after falling from hydraulic running tool 

                        

 

                                 

On 9 January 2019, a drilling contractor working on a rig in the Gulf of Mexico was lifting a 
riser joint with a Hydraulic Running Tool (HRT) and travel block.  The riser joint 
disengaged from the HRT and fell to the drillfloor.  Another floorhand noticed the riser 
falling and was able to evacuate the area prior to impact.  There were no injuries to 
personnel reported.  Damage assessment to equipment is currently ongoing. 
 
The HRT initially appeared to lock in place above the riser joints locking profile. The HRT 
lock dogs were undamaged, and no shearing appears to have occurred.  However, the 
lock dogs appear to have disengaged from the riser locking profile, or were never 
engaged into the locking profile, at the time of the incident. After further investigation, the 
lockout ring was found in the “unlocked” position, indicating the lock dogs were not fully 
engaged, and it was determined that the indicator rods prevented the lockout ring from 
moving into the locked position. 
 
The HRT likely was not inserted into the riser joint at the required depth and the lock dogs 
did not engage the riser joint’s locking profile. The preliminary inquiry shows the indicator 
rods likely were not checked for full travel to the locked state and no confirmed attempt was 
made to move the lockout ring to the locked position to verify proper connection. 
 
BSEE has records of similar incidents of dropped risers from riser lifting tools in 2017 and 
2018.  In each incident, no personnel were injured, but there was reportable damage to 
equipment impacted by the riser. 
 
 

 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Ensure all personnel involved in riser installations review all manufacturer’s 

recommended attaching and running procedures for HRTs and risers.   
 

•  Ensure designated personnel confirm that the hydraulic locking function has fully 

actuated with visual verification of indicator rods and manual lockout. 

•  Ensure the JSA, or procedure for the task of lifting the riser joint, effectively captures 

all applicable hazards and mitigation measures, including the confirmation that the 
locking function has successfully activated before continuing with the job. 

•  Prior to any lifts made by an HRT, all personnel on the rig floor, including the 

auxiliary floor, should clear the floor area. 

 

                                                        -- BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

