Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT RESULTS IN A RESTRICTED WORK CASE 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew was in the process of picking up 5" heavy weight. drill pipe.  The floor man, who was operating 
the air hoist with his left hand, was also holding a pipe drift with his right hand.  His right hand was resting on 
the outside border of the rig floor handrail.  The drift slipped from his hand and fell from rig floor (13 m. 
height).  The drift struck the injured person’s helmet and right shoulder. 
 

 
ALERT 10 – 19 
 

Note the 
position of the 
drift outside 
the hand rail. 

 
The position of the floor man before the drift slipped 
from his right hand. 
 
 

IP’s position when he was passing underneath rig 

 

floor 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Lack of safety awareness from the air hoist operator (floor man) as he was operating the hoist with his 

left hand and holding the drift with right hand. 

  The type of gloves that were being used during the operation were rubber gloves, which were slippery 

due to being contaminated with water base mud. 

  No supervision from the driller since he didn't notice the action of air hoist operator. 
 

Instructed rig personnel that all drifting jobs are to be done on ground deck. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 
  Rubber gloves should only be used when working with oil based mud. 
  Review of JSA/s to address all risks involved with tasks. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2010 

