Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT RESULTS IN SERIOUS NEAR MISS 

 
ALERT 07 – 09 

 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An extremely high potential Near Miss occurred when 
the safety retracting lifeline (SRL) block which weighs 
15 KG (30 pounds), was installed above the monkey 
board  fell  approximately  90  feet  down  to  rig  floor.  
The  SRL  block  landed  6  feet  away  from  the  driller's 
console.    Fortunately,  no  one  was  hit  by  the  falling 
object and there was no equipment damage with the 
exception of the SRL block.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Poor inspection practices conducted on the 

Rig 

•  Safety  pin  may  not  have  been  installed  on 

the four-part shackle, as required.  

•  Safety  procedures  for  proper  installation  of 

equipment were not followed. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this 
incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig Managers and Safety Officers are required to 

acknowledge in writing to the Area HSE 
Department that only four-part shackles are 
being used on the rig floor and on the mast. 

•  Weekly rig inspections must be carried out and 

documented on all shackles, as well as any other 
potential dropped object. 

•  Routine visual inspections can eliminate the 

potential hazard of equipment and fixtures from 
coming loose and falling.  

•  Do not use shackles that are damaged or 

missing any of the four parts. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Incorrect Shackle 

 

Correct Shackle 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
IADC  Note:    Refer  to  Section  16  of  the  HSE  Reference  Guide  for  Information  on  dropped  objects 
prevention.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2007 

