Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 19 
 

DROPPED OBJECT RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During tripping and laying down of the cementing pipe string, the drilling crew discovered a 25.4 cm (10 inch) 
diameter, 0.68 Kg (1.5 lbs) brass thrust washer lying on the rear of the drill floor.  The washer had fallen from 
the inside of the top sheave in the crown assembly of the derrick, missing  the  nearest  worker by  2 meters 
(6.5 feet).  A visual inspection, performed by the crew from the ground using a camera with a telephoto lens, 
identified that the sheave pin (which forms the axle for the sheave) had moved laterally and the sheave was 
noticeably leaning from its normal, vertical position.  A crane equipped with a man basket was mobilized so 
that  personnel could access the crown to  inspect, render safe, and repair the damage.  At this time it  was 
observed that the outer sheave locking plate bolts had sheared and the plate itself was seen resting on the 
edge  of  the  crown  assembly.    These  conditions  created  the  potential  for  a  more  serious  incident, 
necessitating a suspension of rig operations. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The  bolts  that  secure  the  locking  plate  in  place  on  the  crown  housing  became  loose  over  time.    As  a 
result  the  locking  plate  was  making  contact  with  the  sheave  pin.    This  continued  movement  from  the 
sheave pin onto the locking plates resulted in wear on the locking plate bolts and caused the subsequent 
failure of the bolts. 

•  Restricted  access  to  the  locking  plates  did  not  allow  workers  to  clearly  identify  the  backing  off  of  the 

locking plate bolts. 

•  A  review  of  product  specifications  did  not  indicate  a  requirement  to  torque  the  crown  pin  keeper  plate 
bolts to a specified range; or to perform inspections on this area of the crown assembly on a prescribed 
basis. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company installed Nord-Lock Washers® and Loctite® on all lock plate bolts. 
•  To ensure bolts are secure prior to each time the derrick is raised, the lock plate bolts shall be torqued to 
41  lb-ft.  and  this  procedure  will  be  captured  in  the  corresponding  JSA/SOP  for  completing  a  pre-raise 
derrick inspection and in the inspection itself. 

•  Although  the  crown  inspection  that  was  completed  prior  to  the  incident  was  thorough,  it  included  a 
generic statement that “all  crown bolts are secured and in  good repair.”  The inspection  document has 
been updated to specifically identify the need to inspect each locking plate and their corresponding bolts. 
•  This  style  of  the  derrick  does  not  allow  access  to  the  crown  when  it  is  in  the  raised  position.    Rig 
Managers  will  be  provided  with  binoculars  to  inspect  the  crown  assembly,  specifically  the  sheave  pins 
from the ground level during daily walk around inspections. 

 
Credit to: ENFORM Safety Alert #12-2014 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2014 

