 

Dropped objects 

 

Safety Alert 56 

April 2013 

 

What happened? 
NOPSEMA  has  identified  a  concerning  increase  in  dropped  object  events  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013.  Nine 
dropped  object  notifications  have  been  received  by  the  authority  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013.  All  of  these 
dropped  object  events  have  occurred  on  mobile  offshore  drilling  units  (MODUs).  As  a  comparison,  one 
dropped object was reported on MODUs for the same period in 2012 and a total of 13 for the entire year. 
 
The weights and heights of the dropped objects ranged from 2 to 2,300 kilograms and from less than 1 metre 
to 43 metres.  The  dropped  objects were  sections of drill pipe and  casing, a spool of wire rope, a navigation 
light  fitting,  slip  inserts,  a  hose  bundle,  an  equipment  handle  and  a  camera  located  in  the  derrick.  Three 
members of the workforce were injured in three separate dropped object events. Two workers each suffered a 
crush injury to the foot requiring a medical evacuation from the facility, while another worker required first aid 
treatment for a leg injury. In another case, a member of the workforce was standing only 2 metres from where 
a 28 kilogram object landed having dropped from a height of 19 metres. Analysis using the industry supported 
‘DROPS Calculator’1 indicates that six of these dropped object events could have resulted in a fatality. 
 
An analysis of the data reported to NOPSEMA in relation to the dropped object events in 2012 highlighted the 
predominant  root  causes  as  being:  poor  design  of  equipment; work  procedures  followed  incorrectly;  wrong 
procedures used or  no  procedures  used;  dropped objects  not anticipated and factored into the planning for 
the work; lack of training, lack of instruction, lack of understanding of the task; and preventive maintenance 
issues. 
 
Nine notified dropped object events on MODUs for the first quarter compared to thirteen over the preceding 
twelve months is of concern and should be taken as a warning sign by operators and other duty holders that 
action needs to be taken to arrest this trend. 
 
What could go wrong? 
The ‘DROPS Calculator’ highlights that a mass of as little as 700 grams falling from a height of 15 metres could 
result in a fatality. While responsible operators cordon off or barricade areas where a dropped object hazard 
has been identified, it should be kept in mind that dropped objects can bounce on impact and end up in an 
area not anticipated in the risk assessment. 
 
NOPSEMA re-emphasises the need to appropriately apply the hierarchy of controls to dropped object hazards. 
In particular, operators are reminded that the risk management focus should be on elimination, substitution 
and  engineering  controls  before  consideration  of  administrative  controls.  Administrative  controls  such  as 
creating safety zones and areas of restricted access may assist in protecting members of the workforce from 
dropped objects, however, all reasonably practicable steps to eliminate the dropped object hazard altogether, 
substitute the dropped object hazard with a safer alternative, and effectively engineer out the dropped object 
hazard should be considered first and action taken if practicable. 
 
Key lessons 

•  Thorough pre-task risk assessments should address dropped object hazards. 

                                                           
1  

“DROPS is an industry-wide initiative focused on preventing dropped objects, with the ultimate goal of delivering 
a second nature dropped objects prevention strategy across our industry.” 
[http://www.dropsonline.org/index.asp?id=1&refID=4&contentID=4] 

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

 

 

1 of 2 

 

Safety Alert 56 

Scaffolding Safety 

 

•  The  hierarchy  of  controls  should  be  applied  to  ensure  an  appropriate  balance  of  preventative  and 

mitigative control measures are identified and implemented. 

•  Risk assessments should consider areas outside of the anticipated dropped object area. 
•  Regular dropped object prevention inspections should be undertaken, with any resulting action items 

attended to in a timely manner. 

•  Consideration should be given to including competent members of the workforce who do not regularly 
work  in  the  area  to  be  inspected  as  a  ‘fresh  pairs  of  eyes’  in  dropped  object  prevention  inspection 
teams. 

 
The legislation 
In accordance with  Clause  9(1)(a) of  Schedule 3  to the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 
2006: “The operator of a  facility  must  take  all reasonably practicable  steps to ensure  that the facility is safe 
and without risk to the health of any person at or near the facility.” 

In addition, Clause 9(2)(a) of Schedule 3 requires operators to take all reasonably practicable steps to provide 
and  maintain  a  physical  environment  at  the  facility  that  is  safe  and  without  risk  to  health.  Clause  9(2)(c) 
requires operators to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that any plant, equipment, materials and 
substances at the facility are safe and without risk to health. 

Contact 

 

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Alert 56. 

Further practical information and guidance on the DROPS scheme can be found at www.dropsonline.org 
 
NOPSEMA Safety alerts are on the ‘Safety Alerts’ page, under the ‘Safety’ tab at www.nopsema.gov.au 

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

 

 

2 of 2 

