SAFETY ALERT 
 

 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 361 
July 19, 2019  
 
 

 
            

 
       

                                Contact: Bethram Ofolete 

            

Phone: (805) 384-6370 

 

Multiple Crane Incidents during Heavy Lifting Operations 

 
Since October 2018, BSEE is aware of six occurrences involving platform cranes pulling 
and/or striking handrails or other objects during heavy lifting operations on the Pacific Outer 
Continental Shelf (POCS).  The increase in crane activity on the POCS has been largely 
associated with decommissioning activities and ongoing well abandonment operations. All of 
the crane-related incidents involved routine lifts during which the workers failed to recognize 
and mitigate job-specific hazards.  

 

Load 

Caution tape in the center of the photograph 
marks the location where a handrail broke 
off after being struck by a 15,500 lb. load. 

The damaged retainer rod from the April 7, 
2019, incident is visible in the lower right 
portion of the photograph. 

  

 
Below are summaries of three of these crane incidents on the POCS:  
 
On March 31, 2019, during a crane lifting operation, a crane rigger used a handrail as an 
anchor point for fall protection, thereby placing himself in a potentially hazardous situation.  
As a 15,500 lb. fluid pump was being positioned for lifting, the load swung and hit the 
handrail causing the handrail to break off and fall toward the ocean with rigger still anchored 
to it.  The rigger quickly prevented himself from being dragged into the water by sitting down 
and placing his feet on the kick plate.  
 
BSEE’s investigation revealed that the crane rigger and his supervisor should have used 
better judgement when the rigger opted to use a handrail as an anchor point for fall 
protection. The crane crew also failed to re-evaluate the job scope when the lifting operation 
changed to a blind lift.  It was discovered that the operator had different qualified contractors 
certified to conduct various crane operations; however, there was no designated contractor 
for crane operations.  The various contractors on the platform were also found to not be 
working collaboratively, possibly due to their differing safety backgrounds.  

 
On April 7, 2019, a crane operator on a POCS platform was back-loading a boat with a 
lubricator box.  As the crane operator placed the load (the lubrication box) on the deck, a 
large wave caused the boat to drop vertically under the load; the boat then came back up 
and struck the load, causing damage to one of the retaining rods on the lubricator box.  A  
10-foot damaged section of the lubricator fell off the rack and hit the deck with the load (box) 
about one foot off the deck.  
 
On April 8, 2019, a crane on a POCS platform was attempting to re-position a job box when 
the load snagged the handrail and a 100 lb. "gin pole,” which was not secured to the load, 
thereby causing the load to fall approximately 45 feet to the cellar deck. At the time of the 
incident, there were no personnel in the impacted area of the cellar deck, thus there were no 
injuries. There was also no damage to the crane or equipment.  As a result of the incident, 
Stop Work Authority was initiated and a “Safety Stand-down" meeting was conducted with 
all the crane operators and riggers to discuss the incident.  At the meeting, personnel were 
reminded of the importance of inspecting loads prior to lifting operations.  BSEE Inspectors 
investigated the incident and issued an Incident of Non-Compliance (INC) to the lessee for 
failing to ensure that the “gin pole” was properly secured by a bracket prior to lifting. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

 

Incorporate in your Job Safety Analysis (JSA) a “staging plan.”  The plan should 
review, identify and eliminate any rigging hazards, such as removable handrails, 
within the lifting area; 
  

  Ensure that crane operation personnel review the JSA prior to rigging 

operations and include any changes that are capable of changing the work 
classification from a routine operation to non-routine operation, such as a blind 
or heavy lift;  

 

  Ensure that all personnel involved in crane operations and/or rigging review 
the JSA and understand/acknowledge their role in ensuring the safety of the 
upcoming job prior to work commencing. Further the JSA should be specific to 
the job at hand;  
 

  Ensure that crane operators and riggers (platform and boat) are certified in 

  Review your Fall Protection Plan and ensure that personnel are prohibited from 

accordance with API RD 2D, Section 2; 
 

anchoring fall protection lanyards to handrails; 
 

  Ensure that crane operators have a good understanding of ocean conditions to 

properly judge wave swell and sea conditions during the lift; and 
  

  Be sure that personnel are aware of their surroundings and plan crane 

operations in full consideration of those surroundings.  
 

--BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

