Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 02 

LIFTING OPERATION RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  Service  Company  Supervisor  (Independent  Party  [IP])  was  fatally  injured  by  a  load  during  a  lifting 
operation.  The IP was present during the lifting operation to observe the movement of equipment.  The Deck 
Forman  directed  the  IP  to  a  safe  location  prior  to  commencing  the  lift.    After  the  lift  began,  one  of  the 
Roustabouts holding a tag line queried an aspect of the  rigging arrangement with the IP.  During this brief 
exchange, one leg of the sling became caught under the cantilever stairway.  The IP was out of the direct 
line-of-sight of the Deck Foreman and for unknown reasons moved into the lift area.  When the sling became 
free, the load swung towards a nearby container and the IP was caught between the load and the container. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The  Job  Safety  Analysis  (JSA)  did  not  cover  the  use  of  a  bulldog  clamp  and  this  question  became  a 

source of distraction during the lift.  

  The distraction caused one of the tag line handler’s to lose focus on the job. 
  Despite being clearly instructed otherwise, the IP entered the hazard zone. 
  The lifting environment, particularly location of the bundles under the cantilever resulting in a blind lift, an 
overhead  obstruction,  and  the  unexpected  movement  of  the  IP  out  of  the  direct  line  of  sight  of  the 
banksman created additional hazards.  

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Only drilling contractor personnel will be directly involved in lifting operations.  
  Rigging and slinging arrangements shall be agreed with third party contractors prior to commencing a lift.  
  All parties concerned with the lift shall participate in the JSA process.  Clear and unambiguous “stop-the-

job” signals, or commands, must be established and agreed as part of the JSA.  

  Positions  of people  shall be  discussed  and  agreed during  the JSA  process.   The supervisor shall also 
ensure that third parties or other bystanders understand the requirement to remain in designated places 
of safety during lifting operations.  

  Lift  supervisors  must  ensure  EVERYONE  involved  understands  the  lift  plan  and  their  roles  and 

  Drilling contractor personnel involved in lifting operations will focus their full attention for the duration of 

responsibilities in the operation.  

lifts.  

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Lead sling caught 
here 

 

Initial position of 
bundles 

 

 

Container 
(knocked over by 
impact) 

 

Bundle of perforation 
guns 

Overhead View of Main Deck, showing location of items related to the incident. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2011 

