Safety Alert 59

July 2014

Lifting and Rigging Plans

What happened?

Recent NOPSEMA investigations of dangerous occurrences during non-routine lifting and rigging activities, which resulted 
in dropped objects and failed rigging equipment, have identified a trend in the absence of effective lifting and/or rigging 
plans for an operation or partial completion of a plan which was considered ineffective.

The following examples aim to illustrate the above points:









A 40 kg object was dropped 4 metres from a wooden pallet onto a grated walkway as it was being lifted into a 
pump  room.  An  investigation identified  that  a lifting  plan  was  not  completed  for  the  lift, as  required  by  the 
operator’s  safety  management  system.    Requirements regarding  pallet  lifts  were  also  not  detailed  in  the 
operators lifting procedures. NOPSEMA notes that the lifting of wooden pallets is not permitted by some facility 
operators.

An investigation  into  rigging  equipment, which  parted  in  a drilling  derrick, found  that  a rigging  plan  was  not 
completed for the rigging operation as required by the operator’s safety management system. The investigation 
also  found  that  the  rigging  loads  were  not  accurately  estimated  or  calculated, and  that  the  selected  rigging 
equipment was subsequently determined as being under-rated for the anticipated loading.

A manned forklift, which was being utilised to suspend a rigging equipment arrangement, toppled-over on the 
deck as a result of rigging equipment failure. An investigation identified that, contrary to the operator’s safety 
management system, the rigging operation was conducted without a rigging plan and without rigging loads being
determined for any part of the operation.

An investigation into the lifting of a manned Fast Rescue Craft (FRC) for regular launch and recovery operations
using the  facility  crane identified  that  the lifting  plan  was  only  partially  completed.    The  lifting plan  did  not 
identify  the  actual  or  estimated  weight  of  the  load  being  lifted  and  subsequently,  the  rigging  selected  was 
identified as being under-rated for the actual lifting operation.

Failure of over-loaded

wire rope sling

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

Rev 0 A359047

16/07/2014

1 of 2

Toppled forklift (manned at the time)

Safety Alert 59

Lifting & Rigging Plans

What could go wrong?
Failure of lifting equipment can potentially result in a dropped load or dropped object, while failures of rigging equipment 
can  potentially  result  in  an  uncontrolled  vertical  or  horizontal  movement  of  the  load  or  equipment. The examples 
provided of failures of lifting and rigging equipment could have resulted in serious injuries or a fatality, while the potential 
failure in the under-rated FRC rigging had the potential for multiple fatalities.

Key lessons
The following recommendations should be considered.

Lifting or rigging plans should be completed in accordance with the facility safety management system, and should be:

completed for every lifting or rigging operation (routine and non-routine)

completed by suitably trained and competent personnel

reviewed by a competent person

approved by the supervisor of the lifting or rigging operation to ensure all of the identified controls are in place 
prior to commencement and remain in place for the duration of the activity.

Lifting  and  rigging  plans  are  an integral  part  of hazard  identification  as  a  component  of  the  overall  risk  management
process for safe management of lifting and rigging operations.

The  detail  required  in  the  lifting  and  rigging  plans should  be  proportional to  the  complexity  and  frequency  of  the 
operation.    Frequent  or  simple tasks  may  only  require  a  basic plan  while  infrequent or  complex  lifting  or  rigging 
operations  may  require  significant  engineering. Also,  lifting  and  rigging  plans  on  floating  facilities  should  consider  the 
dynamic effects on loads and resulting dynamic amplification factors.

It has been reported by operators that many lifting and rigging incidents have occurred during what is perceived as low 
risk operations.  It is important that these risks are effectively managed with lifting and rigging plans as part of the overall 
risk  assessment  process  to  ensure  the  operations  are  safe and  risks  are  reduced  to  as  low  as  reasonably  practicable 
(ALARP).

The legislation
Clause 9 of Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 requires that “The operator of a 
facility must take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the facility is safe and without risk to the health of any 
person at or near the facility.” This includes an obligation to take all reasonable practicable steps to:

implement and maintain systems of work that are safe and without risk to health [Clause 9(2)(d)]; and

provide all members of the workforce with the information, training and supervision necessary for them to carry 
out their activities in a manner that does not adversely affect the safety of persons at the facility [Clause 9(2)(f)].

Contact

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Alert 59.  NOPSEMA safety alerts are on published at 
nopsema.gov.au, on the ‘Safety Alerts’ page under the ‘Safety’ tab.

The following oil and gas publications provide further guidance and recommended practice on lift planning and provide 
examples of lift plans.

International  Association  of  Oil  &  Gas  Producers,  Lifting  &  hoisting  safety  recommended  practice,  Report  No. 
376, April 2006.  http://www.ogp.org.uk/pubs/376.pdf

The  International  Maritime  Contractors  Association,  Guidelines  for  Lifting  operations,  IMCA  M  187,  October 
2007.  http://info.ogp.org.uk/liftingandhoisting/RPR/IMCASEL0192.pdf

UK  Health  &  Safety  Executive,  Lifting  Operations  and  Lifting  Equipment  Regulations  1998,  Safe  use  of  lifting 
equipment.  http://www.hseni.gov.uk/l113_safe_use_of_lifting_equipment.pdf



















National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

Rev 0 A359047

16/07/2014

2 of 2

