Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 08  
 

CONFINED SPACE ACTIVITY RESULTS IN LOSS OF  

CONSCIOUSNESS INCIDENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Vessel  maintenance  was  being  conducted  on  an  accommodation  barge.    Preparation  was  being  made  to 
enter a tank at the base of a column to undertake quarterly planned maintenance of the leakage detection 
system.  The injured party (IP) removed a manhole cover to gain vertical access into tank at the base of the 
column.  Within one minute of removing the manhole cover the gas detector alarm sounded and the IP lost 
consciousness on the floor of column next to the open tank hatch.  Although the IP fully recovered with no 
residual ill health effects, the incident was rated High Potential Incident, Medical Treatment Case, Lost Time. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Subsequent  gas  sampling  during  the  investigation  was  undertaken  and  recorded  unexpectedly  high 

  The presence of hydrogen resulted from electrolytic reaction between the sacrificial anodes and the steel 

  There was no review or analysis of the abnormal alarm for CO gas reading in the column the day before 

  Warning signs from the readings taken from the column were not acted upon.  
  The potential for hydrogen accumulation had not been identified or mitigated against. 
  Physical  arrangements  within  the  column  did  not  allow  for  ventilation  without  first  opening  the  tank  lid. 
Therefore, the generic confined space entry procedure could not be wholly applied, re: forced ventilation. 

levels of hydrogen. 

within the ballast tank. 

the incident.  

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Company  management  is  to  review  current  documented  procedures  and  vessel  practices  associated 

with confined space entry, particularly given the potential presence of hydrogen. 

2.  The  vessel  management  are  to  review  and  mitigate  against  the  risks  associated  with  build  up  of 
hydrogen within ballast tanks and other freely-communicated pathways.  This shall include risks from fire 
and explosion, as well as potential inhalation risks. 

3.  Company and vessel management are to explore options of mitigating against confined space entry into 

ballast tanks 
  Engineered solution regarding alternative leak detection systems.  
  Engineered solution regarding air monitoring techniques. 

4.  Company management is to review task risk assessment and incident reporting procedures, to ensure 

that all unusual, potentially hazardous situations are reported and acted upon as appropriate. 

5.  Client  to  review  its  processes  for  engaging  with  and  sharing  key  aspects  of  its  HSSE  Management 
System with its contract partners.  Particular emphasis to be placed upon their published Life Savers and 
supporting standards and Knowledge Management / Safety Alerts. 

6.  Both  the  company  and  Client  should  take  the  learning  from  this  incident  to  review  and  improve  their 
safety  systems  such  that  the  risks  from  confined  space  entry  are  more  effectively  and  proactively 
managed. 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2009 

