Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 24 
 

CONFINED SPACE INCIDENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  incident  with  an  extremely  high  potential  occurred  due  in  the  large  part  to  a  complete  disregard  for 
established procedures.  While the investigation of this incident has not yet been completed it is important 
that  we share  what  is known so  that we can  all review  the event  and raise  the  awareness  of  the  potential 
hazards of confined space entry.   
 
Event:  A watertight hatch was removed from a void space located at deck level in anticipation of an NDT 
inspection and possible welding work.  In preparation for the initial inspection, two employees were instructed 
to  clean  out  water  and  debris  from  the  floor  of  the  void.    This  particular  void  space  was  approximately  10 
meters deep and consisted of 5 different levels.  One employee entered the void space through the hatch at 
deck level while the other man remained outside of the void acting as the watchman.  Communications were 
maintained by a call and response process at five minute intervals.  After approximately fifteen minutes into 
the task; the watcher did not receive a timely response and reacted by entering the void to investigate.  The 
watchman found the first employee unconscious at the top level of the void space.  The watchman then left 
and  called  for  help  and  two  supervisors  arrived  at  the  scene.    One  supervisor  entered  the  void  wearing 
proper Breathing Apparatus (BA) and at the top level realized the atmosphere was oxygen deficient.  He then 
removed his BA set and left it running next to the IP while he exited the confined space to get another BA 
set.  The  IP  revived  and  made  his  own  way  down  the  ladder  and  out  of  the  confined  space  area.    After  a 
period of recovery, the IP showed no ill effects from his collapse. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT & Findings: 
 
A sign was posted as required to identify this void as a confined space / entry allowed by permit only, but the 
warning  sign  was  ignored  by  both  employees.    This  job  commenced  without  the  controls  of  any  Permit  to 
Work in place. 
 
What can we tell from the description of events and preliminary findings? 
 
•  The employees probably identified the hazard because one acted as a watchman. 
•  However no testing of the atmosphere took place. 
•  The void was identified as a confined space but no PTW was utilized. 
•  The watchman entered the space on his own prior to calling for help. 
•  At one time we had two employees inside the void area without breathing apparatus. 
• 

It  would  appear  that  no  formal  risk  assessment  had  been  carried  out  and  consequently  there  was  no 
defined rescue plan in place. 

 
Two men arriving at the scene with one BA set between them is not an acceptable confined space rescue 
plan.  The rescuer removed his BA set in a known oxygen deficient atmosphere.  This “At-Risk Behavior, 
lack  of  planning,  compliance  and  Supervision”  could  have  resulted  in  a  multiple  fatality.    On  this 
particular  job,  safety  was  not  a  choice,  Safety  was  left  to  chance  and  the  result  can  be  attributed  to 
nothing more than luck.  We are all aware of the hazards associated with confined space entry and the need 
for an appropriate response and rescue to be in place prior to the commencement of the task. 
 
Proper risk assessment would have identified the need for a Permit to Work and permits / certificates would 
have required the atmosphere to have been tested prior to and during the course of the entry. JRA and PTW 
would have addressed other important measures like proper fall protection, lighting, notification, spot checks, 
available personnel and equipment required at the scene. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company all rig supervisors to do the 
following: 
 
Discuss this incident at your next Weekly Safety Meeting and ask the following questions. 
 
•  Could this happen on your rig? 
•  Are you sure? 
•  Are we always doing what we say? 
•  The only way to be certain is by questioning, testing and verifying. 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2005 

