 This incident has several things in common with the June 1974 explosion in Flixborough, England (June 2004 Process Safety Beacon). The Flixborough explosion killed 28 workers, injured 36, and had a major impact on process safety management systems and regulations throughout the world. The pipe which failed at Flixborough was much larger, but some common characteristics of this incident and the Flixborough explosion include:ŁA management of change review was not done for a temporary piping modification.ŁThe temporary piping did not follow appropriate engineering standards, and the piping was not properly supported.ŁStress on temporary piping was one factor in the failure.Follow your plant™s Management of Change procedure for allmodifications of piping, equipment, and procedures.Remember that temporary modifications require the same thorough analysis as permanent changes. Never make changes to piping or equipment without review by qualified experts to assure that the change follows engineering standards and good practice. Follow recommendations from the manufacturer of your equipment.If ﬁtemporaryﬂ modifications are made to a plant, they should have an ﬁexpiration dateﬂ, and be removed before that date. You should do another management of change review for removal of the temporary installation. Don™t let a temporary change become permanent without review!If you see equipment in your plant which is no longer used or needed, suggest that it be removed!A filter on the suction of a pump frequently plugged. Because of this, the pressure needed to be monitored, both in the field and at the control panel. To minimize installation time for a pressure transmitter, it was decided to install a tap on the existing connection for the local pressure gauge and connect a pressure transmitter to this tap. Because of the rush and the temporary nature of the change, it was decided to use tubing for the change. The installation, though accepted as a temporary installation, did not follow appropriate design codes or engineering standards, and no management of change review was done. Approximately three years later, the tubing ruptured and combustible material at a temperature of 360°C leaked to the atmosphere. The leaking material ignited and started a major fire which destroyed the plant.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelUse your Management of Change process for ﬁtemporaryﬂ changes!AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Manage Temporary Changes!This issue sponsored byThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsOctober 2012What can you do?www.iomosaic.comWhy did it happen?The temporary installation did not follow appropriate engineering design standards.The piping and the temporary installation were subject to vibration caused by the pump.The pressure gauge installed at the end of the tubing acted as a pendulum. Tubing does not have adequate mechanical strength to withstand vibration and to support instrumentation, such as the pressure transmitter.After the cause of the plugging filters on the suction pipe of the pump was eliminated, the temporary installation and the pressure transmitter were not needed, but were never removed.As a ﬁtemporaryﬂ installation, the pressure gauge may not have received attention, inspection, and maintenance, particularly after it was no longer needed. It may just have been forgotten! The 1974 Flixborough explosion