This issue sponsored by

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Accumulation of small changes leads to an explosion
In September 2012, at an industrial site in Himeji, Japan, a 70 cu m (18,500 US gal) fixed roof acrylic acid (AA) tank 

November 2018

exploded, and a fire followed. There was one fatality, a fire-fighter. 36 people were injured – 2 policemen, 24 fire-
fighters, and 10 plant workers. The tank was destroyed and nearby facilities were significantly damaged (Photo 1). There 
were no major impacts to the neighborhood and environment.

The tank provided intermediate storage between two distillation columns for purifying AA. Originally the tank had 

been used at full capacity. The contents were cooled and mixed by pumping from the bottom of the tank to the top. Later, 
the normal operating level was reduced to a level below the cooling coil. The contents were no longer recirculated to the 
top of the tank, but instead to a nozzle near the bottom that was also used to connect a level gauge (Drawing 2).

At the time of explosion, the plant was conducting a test of the downstream distillation column, which required 

stopping feed from this tank. The level of the tank gradually increased to its original operating level. Without recycle to 
the top of the tank, the AA above the cooling coils was not mixed and cooled. The temperature of the incoming AA was 
believed to be below the onset temperature for polymerization, and the AA contained polymerization inhibitor. However, 
the temperature in the tank increased, especially at the top. The tank eventually over pressurized and exploded.
Courtesy of Nippon Shokubai

Photo 1:  Destroyed AA Tank

Drawing 2:  Only the bottom of the tank was cooled, the liquid above  became hot

Reference: Nippon Shokubai Co., Ltd. Himeji Plant Explosion and Fire at Acrylic Acid Production Facility Investigation Report March 2013.

What happened?

What can you do?

 Originally the pipe feeding the tank was hot water jacketed to 

 Never make any changes to your plant, even 

provide freeze protection, but this was changed to steam.

 Removal of a steam trap made temperature control unreliable.
 The top layer was no longer mixed with cooler AA, and stayed 

changes you think are small, without following your 
plant Management of Change (MOC) procedures.

 When you see any change in your plant, ask if there 

warm from incoming AA.

 There are two exothermic AA self-reactions – dimerization 

and polymerization. Polymerization inhibitor does not stop the 
dimerization reaction. Experiments showed that heat from 
dimerization raised the temperature sufficiently to start a 
runaway polymerization reaction.

 The hazard of heat from dimerization was not recognized, so 

recirculation to the top of tank was not resumed.

 The tank had no temperature indicator. The first indication of a 

problem was observation of AA vapors escaping from the top 
vent on the tank.

has been an MOC review. If there has been, and 
you were not informed of the change, tell your 
supervisor. You should always be informed of 
changes in your plant that impact your job.

 If something is different from normal operation, 

confirm operating procedures or ask your 
supervisor what to do.

 Accumulation of small changes can cause an 

incident with a big consequence. All small changes 
must be identified and the risk to the total system 
analyzed and adequately managed.

Small changes can cause a big consequence!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

