Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 11  

WHAT HAPPENED: 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE TONG SNUB-LINE  

REMOVAL RESULTS IN AN INJURY 

The  Drill  crew  was  preparing  to  test  BOP  and  the  Driller  instructed  the  crew  that  he  was  going  to  make  up  the  TDS  and 
would require back-up tongs on the drill pipe.  The tongs were placed on the pipe and the TDS spin function engaged to 
make up the connection.  As the connection neared complete make-up, the tongs spun around with no snub-line attached 
and the tong operator was caught between the breakout line and the drill pipe.  The employee received minor injuries, but 
the potential for catastrophic injury was high.  

Casing  had  been  run  several  days  prior  to  the  incident  and  when  the  casing  equipment  was  rigged  down  from  the  drill 
floor.    The  snub-line  that  was  attached  to  the  casing  tong  was  removed  but  not  immediately  re-secured  to  the  back-up 
tong.    In  addition  there  were  deficiencies  in  the  proper  application  of  Competency  and  Short  Service  Employee 
identification  on  the  crew.    The  Pre-Job  meeting  did  not  include  discussion  of  hazards  or  safety  and  did  not  adequately 
define crewmembers’ responsibilities.  Proper rig-up of the drill floor was not confirmed.  Tongs were not inspected prior to 
latching to pipe.  Tong operator mistook the 5/8” breakout line for the 1” snub-line.  The stanchion is designed for 2 snub-
lines, however only 1 snub-line was attached to it.  Using a single snub-line for different tongs (casing, drill pipe) 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

Issued the following Directives:  

•  When an  employee is promoted to a new  position he  will  be designated  a Short Service Employee, and  will  wear a 

Green Hardhat during his orientation period.  

•  Rig-Based new hires and all rig based employees being promoted to a new position must complete within 6-months 
the respective Competency HSE and Position Form with their first line supervisor.  This training must start immediately 
once the new hire arrives onboard, or once the employee is promoted to a new position.  
First  Line  Supervisors  are  responsible  for  accurate  verification  of  the  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  of  their 
crewmembers  as  per  company  policy.    Therefore,  Supervisors  working  with  a  new  crew  must  take  extra  care  to 
ensure each member understands their responsibilities, hazards and safety precautions. 

• 

•  Pre-job  meetings  must  not  only  consist  of  Operations,  but  must  also  consist  of  communicating  safety  related 

information to all personnel involved in the task, including hazard identification and safety precautions.  

•  Ensure snub-line shackles are moused; this includes both the tong and stanchion ends.  
• 

3” x 2” safety tong decals are available through your Safety Supervisor.  Obtain similar products locally or contact the 
company HSE department for assistance a. Correct Hand Placement;  b. Check Snub-Line;  c. Watch Pinch Points  

Action Items  

•  Add second snub-line to stanchion to be used as needed for auxiliary tongs.  The initial snub-line will be designated for 
rig tongs and not for running casing or auxiliary tongs.  It must not be removed from the drill pipe tongs unless replacing 
or  inspecting  snub-line.    If  stanchion  is  not  designed  for  multiple  attachments,  Company  Technical  Services  must  be 
notified.  

•  All  Supervisors  are  to  review  company  policy  on  Rig  Induction/Safety  Buddy  and  Hardhat  Program  with  all  crew 
personnel at the next General Safety Meeting and ensure  Supervisors and employees understand their responsibility 
regarding this policy.  
The  Training  Department  will  revise  World  Wide  Competency  Training  to  clarify  that  competency  training  must  start 
immediately once the new hire arrives aboard the facility, or once the employee is promoted to a new position.   
The company Training Department  will revise Roustabout I Competency  Training to include certain safety critical drill 
floor operations for Roustabout I position. 

• 

• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued March 2004 

