Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 19 
 

INADEQUATE MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE 

RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED? 
 
An  incident  occurred  when  a  45-foot  joint  of  5-inch  XL  liner  was  being  hoisted  into  the  V-Door.    The  rig 
personnel were using a set of single joint elevators and the rig floor air hoist.  The joint of liner came free from 
the  latched  elevators  allowing  it  to  slide  down  the  V-Door  towards  the  catwalk.    The  joint  of  casing  then 
bounced  and  given  the  high  center  of  gravity  the  box  end  “rocked”  towards  the  rig  floor  where  it  struck  the 
derrickman on the side of the head, resulting in a fatal blow.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT? 
 
The Well Program kept changing, which resulted in an ineffective Management of Change (MOC) process and 
there was failure by both the client and the contractor to effectively plan for these changes.  Because of the 
ineffective  MOC  there  was  failure  to  check  technical  specifications  for  equipment  required  for  this  job.    The 
operator was responsible for supplying all running tools up to 7” but when the tools and the third party casing 
crew arrived at the rig site it was noted that there was no 5” single joint pick up elevators supplied. Although 
this was the first occasion that this type of casing had been run by the rig the decision was taken jointly by the 
Drilling  Foreman  and  the  Company  Man  to  utilize  the  Rig’s  own  elevators.  This  decision  was  not 
communicated from the rig site to the Office based operations management. The rig’s elevators were dressed 
with inserts for 5” drill pipe and no consideration was given to the comparative taper difference between drill 
pipe and the casing to be run other than the elevators being tested on the casing by latching and unlatching 
them.   
 
There  was  no  discussion  of,  nor  reference  to,  determining  actual  engineering  specifications  of  compatibility 
between the casing and the elevators to be used. The investigation identified other areas of non compliance 
such  as  a  failure  to  comply  with  the  Company’s  Task  Risk  Mitigation  process,  inadequate  Job  Risk 
Assessment and less than full participation in the Company’s Vocational Training Modules.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 

•  Closer monitoring of Company Training compliance at the rig site 
•  A more thorough Job Risk Assessment of the planned task. 
•  Compliance with the established Management of Change process 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Issued May 2004 

