 

Safety alert 60 

August 2014 

 

Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP) deck gratings 

What happened? 

During a recent facility inspection, a NOPSEMA inspector observed Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP) deck gratings 
were being used as a part of the designated emergency exit route across a facility. Upon further investigation, 
it  was  discovered  a  decision  to  replace  the  original  steel  grating  with  FRP  grating  had  not  considered  the 
vulnerability of FRP  grating  to  hydrocarbon fires. This was of  concern given recent warnings  about  potential 
failures of fire resistant composite materials used offshore (see ‘References’ section below).  Furthermore, it 
was apparent the operator had failed to consider all implications of changing materials and was informed of 
the  need  to  reassess  their  decision  to  ensure  that  the  risks  associated  with  FRP  were  reduced  to  as  low  as 
reasonably practicable (ALARP). 

What could go wrong? 

FRP deck gratings have the potential to appear undamaged after being exposed to hydrocarbon fires and can 
catastrophically fail while under the load of an individual. For example, a worker who runs over the grating has 
the potential to fall and encounter serious injury. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1   FRP (left) and steel (right) gratings post dynamic testing.  
Image courtesy of Health and Safety Executive, United Kindgom  

Key lessons 

•  Operators should ensure that when proposing to make a change they take all reasonably practicable 

steps to source available safety information related to the change, and act on it where appropriate. 

•  FRP grating has been shown to be vulnerable to hydrocarbon fires and its use on an offshore facility 

needs to be assessed to ensure that risks associated with its use are ALARP. 

• 

If  facility  operators  use  FRP  grating  they  need  to  clearly  define  the  performance  required  of  the 
grating.  For  example  the  temperature  and  duration  of  fire  that  the  FRP  should  resist  and  still 
subsequently support a minimum weight under dynamic conditions. 

•  The  performance  required  of  the  FRP  grating  should  then  be  compared  against  the  performance 

described by suppliers to ensure that the FRP grating can meet its required performance. 

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

A339029      Rev 0 

21/08/14 

1 of 2 

 

Safety alert 60 

FRP deck gratings 

The legislation 
Clause  9  of  Schedule  3  of  the  Offshore  Petroleum  and  Greenhouse  Gas  Storage  Act  2006  requires  that  
“The  operator  of  a  facility  must  take  all  reasonably  practicable  steps  to  ensure  that  the  facility  is  safe  and 
without  risk  to  the  health  of  any  person  at  or  near  the  facility.”    This  includes  an  obligation  to  take  all 
reasonable practicable steps to: 

• 

implement and maintain appropriate procedures and equipment for the control of, and response to, 
emergencies at the facility [Clause 9(2)(e)]; and 

•  provide  all  members  of  the  workforce  with  the  information,  training  and  supervision  necessary  for 
them to carry out their activities in a manner that does not adversely affect the safety of persons at 
the facility [Clause 9(2)(f)]. 

References 

The  following  oil  and  gas  publications  provide  further  information  on  the  issue  of  FRP  deck  grating 
vulnerability: 

1.  Health and Safety Executive. (2012). HID 2-2012 - Warning to offshore industry on possible failure of 
fire resistant composite deck gratings. Retrieved from http://www.hse.gov.uk/safetybulletins/deck-
gratings.htm?eban=govdel-offshore-bulletin&cr=02-Oct-2012# 

2.  Health and Safety Executive. (2012). RR950 - Preliminary fire testing of composite offshore pedestrian 

gratings. Retrieved from http://www.hse.gov.uk/research/rrhtm/rr950.htm 

3.  Oil and Gas UK. 2013. Technical Note - Subject: Fire Resistance of Composite Grating. Retrieved from 

http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk/templates/asset-relay.cfm?frmAssetFileID=3194 

Contact 

For  further  information  email  alerts@nopsema.gov.au  and  quote  Alert  60.  NOPSEMA  safety  alerts  are 
published at nopsema.gov.au, on the ‘Safety Alerts’ page under the ‘Safety’ tab. 

 

 

 

 

 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

A339029     Rev 0 

18/08/14 

2 of 2 

