 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceThis Edition Sponsored byPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelMay 2004Hot Work + Undetected Gas Leak = Damage and InjuryHot Work + Undetected Gas Leak = Damage and InjuryCENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSWhat Happened?What You Can Do to Prevent it from Happening to YouPSID Sponsors see: Free SearchŠHot Work–and you won™t End it with a BANG!OperationsŁLook around the area where the hot work will be performed and do a thorough gas check of all potential sources---not just the obvious ones. Use extra care when checking in or near small enclosures (like the one in this incident).ŁIf your job duties include using gas detection equipment, you should have been trained in its use. Remember, equipment must be calibrated per manufacturer™s recommendations or it may not give the correct reading!ŁKnow where leak sources couldoccur, and be sure to sample there. If conditions are likely to change, consider continuous monitoring.MaintenanceŁLook around the work area for sources of flammable material and be aware of any strange odor. Remember, you will be supplying the ignition source so all that is needed is fuel.ŁAsk the operator exactly where a gas test was performed. If one was not done, insist that it be done. If it did not cover all potential source areas, insist that a retest be done.A welder was grinding near this flow transmitter enclosure. There was a small leak in the transmitter assembly and the enclosure filled with flammable vapors. Vapors escaping the box were ignited by the grinding sparks causing a small explosion which injured the welder and destroyed the transmitter. Operations had performed a gas test in the area before issuing the hot work permit but the leak in the enclosure went undetected.Start your Hot Work Safely–www.acutech-consulting.comBeforeAfterThis edition is also available in Spanish, French, Portuguese and German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.