 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJuly 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSDedicated to all those that lost their lives or were injured in the Piper Alpha tragedyThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Portuguese, and Spanishsh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Portuguese, and SpanishHere™s What HappenedHow Did This Happen ?What You Can DoSeventeen years ago (July 6, 1988), leaking natural gas condensate on the Piper Alpha oil platform in the North Sea exploded. The explosion disabled the communications center and was followed by a fireball and a large oil pool fire. The fire ruptured a major gas line that was transporting gas from another oil platform to Piper Alpha. That massive gas release caused a larger explosion and fire which engulfed the entire platform. Within an hour, other gas lines ruptured and the fire was completely out of control.165 workers and 2 rescuers were killed. The platform was totally destroyed.Piper Alpha Oil Platform DestroyedThe Piper Alpha platform drilled for oil and processed natural gas from other platforms. A maintenance crew was working on a pump in the gas processing unit. As part of their work, they removed a relief valve from the pump™s discharge lineŠbut did NOTinstall a regular blind flange to cover the opening. They did not complete the repair work that shift so they told the shift supervisor that the pump should not be used. Unfortunately, this message was not given to the operators on the next shift.When the primary pump failed, the operators started the pump that had been taken out of service. Gas condensate immediately escaped from the opening where the relief valve should have been. An explosion and fire occurred damaging fire walls and the control room. The heat from this fire ruptured gas transportation pipelines from other platformsŠwhich added to the fire and ensuing damage. The fire water pumps had been placed in the ﬁmanualﬂ position since divers were in the sea earlier during the day and no one activated the system during the emergency. Emergency evacuation routes from the crew™s living quarters were blocked by smoke and fires. ŁCommunicate effectively at shift turnover. Inform the oncoming shift what equipment is out of service and why. A log book can be a very effective tool for this task!ŁDo not short cut maintenance or safety procedures. Complete all permits, make sure that the oncoming shift knows about them and understands their importance.ŁKnow the hazards your unit imposes on other units and the hazards they impose on yours. Know what to shut down when there is a problem.ŁRestore automatic fire protection systems to service as soon as they are available. Take special precautions when they are out of service for repair or testing and return them to service as soon as possible! ŁKnow emergency evacuation routes for all types of emergencies and hazard locations.Incomplete Maintenance Activity + Poor Shift Turnover = Disaster*Guidelines for Investigating Chemical Process Incidents, 1992, CCPS of AIChEPSID Members see: Phase of OperationŠMaintenance during Operation