 On the left, a foreman (F), a welder (W), and 2 maintenance workers (M) were welding on Tank 1. Proper hot work procedures were not followed. There was no check of the atmosphere for flammable vapors using a flammable gas detector. Instead, Tank 1 was checked for flammable vapors by inserting a lit welding torch into the tank Œan unsafe practice in itself. The tanks were interconnected, but not properly isolated, and some contained flammable vapors, which vented into the welding area and ignited. The foreman and the 2 maintenance workers were killed, and the welder was seriously injured. Also note the makeshift ﬁwork platformﬂŒa ladder placed between the Tanks 1 and 2, on which people were working.On the right, welding was being done near a gasoline truck, again without following proper hot work permit procedures. Flammable vapors ignited causing a fire and explosion. One end of the truck was found against a building on the other side of the street! One person was killed and another was seriously injured.Know and follow safe hot work procedures!What Happened?September 2007AIChE ©2007. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319Hot Work PermitsWhat can you do?Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.and Thai.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelRecognize hazardous hot work activities Œwelding, cutting, grinding, operation of gas or diesel engines, or any other spark producing activity which could ignite flammable vapors.Understand and follow your facility™s hot work permit procedures.Ensure that hot work permits are issued by properly trained and qualified personnel.If you have any doubt about the safety of a hot work activity (or any other work activity!), stop the work immediately and bring your concerns to the attention of management.Use a flammable gas detector designed to safely identify a flammable atmosphere.12