 Safety Alert 002 - ANP/SSM 

Integrity Management of Passive Fire Protection 

 

The Superintendence of Operational Safety and Environment is issuing this safety 
alert to notify the petroleum and gas industry and other stakeholders about the repeated 
failing  in  passive  fire  protection  (PFP)  availability  management  in  offshore  production 
facilities. 

This safety alert emerges from diagnostics obtained in conformity audits, which are based on ANP 
Resolution  n.  43/2007.  More  than  50%  of  the  identified  deviations  about  PFP  relate  to  failures  in 
implementing the safety studies recommendations, including fire and explosion assessments and other risks 
analyses. 

 

Passive Fire Protection 

Passive  fire  protection  –  PFP  is  defined  by  API  RP 
2218  (Fireproofing  Practices 
in  Petroleum  and 
Petrochemical  Processing  Plants)  as  a  barrier, 
coating  or  other 
safeguard  which  provides 
protection  against  the  heat  from  a  fire  without 
additional intervention. 

PFP  aims  to  improve  the  capability  of  maintaining 
the  structural  integrity  of  an  equipment  and  its 
structure  during  a  fire  scenario.  Thus,  this  barrier 
acts  in  a  passive  way,  unlike  an  active  protection, 
such  as  fixed  and  portable  firefighting  systems, 
which  demands  further 
intervention  after  the 
incident occurs. 

According  to  API  RP  2218,  the  core  value  of 
fireproofing is critical during the early stages of a fire, 
when efforts are initially directed at shutting down 
the  unit,  interrupting  fuel  supply  to  the  fire  and 
actuating fixed firefighting equipment. If non-fireproofed piping and equipment supporting structures lose 
their  strength  due  to  fire-related  heat  exposure,  they  can  collapse,  escalating  the  scenario,  which 
consequently may lead to increased hydrocarbon leaks, victims and environmental and property damages. 

 

The  International  Organization  for  Standardization 
states in ISO standard 13702:2015 requirements and guidelines 
to  control  and  mitigate  fire  and  explosion  on  offshore 
production  facilities.  This  document  indicates  PFP  typical 
applications in critical areas of these units, based on experience 
in offshore E&P activities. It also emphasizes the necessity of a 
specific evaluation for each individual unit, considering the fire 
and  explosion  studies  as  well  as  the  emergency  response 
strategy. 

According to results from consequence studies elaborated by operators, and considering that passive 
fire protection aims to reduce human exposure to occasional failures, PFP is regarded as a critical element 
in operational safety. 

 

 

Potential consequences 

The degradation, absence or non-conformity to the specifications of a PFP may enable the escalation 
of  the  accidental  scenario,  due  to  failure  in  critical  elements,  causing  a  reduction  in  available  time  for 
personnel evacuation and interfering emergency control actions to prevent a massive environmental and 
financial impact. 

Identified deviations 

The  following  evidences  of  PFP  integrity  management  failures  were  observed  in  13  offshore 
production units, whether new or aged, categorized as fixed platforms, semi-submersibles and FPSOs, from 
2015 to 2018: 

 

Incomplete inspection and maintenance plans: 

  Plans without a detailed list of tasks to be accomplished during inspection. 
  Plans that do not comprise the entire PFP of the unit. 
  Lack of PFP observation during execution of the maintenance plan for a SDV (shutdown valve) 

located on the risers. 

 

Implementation of alternative solutions without technical background: 

  Substitute  PFP  class  J-60  on  deck floor  along  the  riser porch  for  encapsulation  of the  riser 
flanges,  without  technical  evaluation  of  the  protection  level  assured  by  the  alternative 
solution on the identified critical scenarios. 

  Substitute  PFP  for  deluge  system  (active  protection),  without  technical  evaluation  of  the 

protection level assured by the alternative solution on the identified critical scenarios. 

  Partial implementation of safety study recommendations without technical background: 

  Lack  of  installation  of  PFP  recommended  by  quantitative  study  for  critical  parts  (e.g.  blow 
down and ESD valves), without quantitative verification to justify the decision of not installing. 

  Partial installation or lack of PFP: 

  Lack of installation of PFP in the production and exportation risers’ connections, riser balcony 
piping,  lower  part  of  the  communication  tower  structure  and  communication  cables  tray 
system. 
Incomplete installation of PFP in well piping in the riser balcony area, limiting its application 
to the SDVs that shut the well lines and to the piping segment between flanges, excluding the 
flanges upstream the SDVs. 

 

  Degradation of installed PFP: 

the oil transfer pumps. 

  Highly damaged conditions of PFP installed in the pipe rack columns and the columns next to 

  Lack of equivalent alternative controls to compensate the lack or degradation of a critical element: 
  Removal of PFP from vertical and diagonal columns of the cellar deck, from the pig launcher 
and  receiver  area,  from  the  slug  catcher  and  gas  exportation,  without  taking  any  further 
contingency measures. 

  PFP in degraded condition, without proper contingency measures. 

  Prioritization not compatible with the risk level of the structures: 

  PFP installed in many areas, but critical elements without protection. 
  Extended  schedule  for  recomposing  degraded  PFP  that  did  not  consider  risk  criteria  for 

prioritization. 

Regulatory Framework 

According to the ANP Resolution n. 43/2007, Operational Safety Management System (SGSO): 

Item 1.5 (Resources Planning and Assessment) requires that “the rig operator shall plan and provide 
the  necessary  resources  for  the  implementation  and  operation  of  the  SGSO  and  to  attend  to  further 
requirements”. 

Item 10.2.1 (Management and Organization) states that “the rig operator shall comply with project 
criteria,  industry  standards  and  good  engineering  practices,  regarding  project  planning,  construction, 
installation and deactivation of the unit”. 

Item 11.3.1 states: “the rig operator shall establish contingency procedures and define approval and 
control system for these procedures, to be used when Operational Safety Critical Equipment or Systems are 
in poor conditions or out of operation”. In addition, in agreement with this item, the item 11.3.2 states “such 
procedures will establish temporary measures that might make up for the absence of Operational Safety 
Critical  Equipment  or  Systems,  due  to  failure,  degradation  or  deactivation.  Such  measures  shall  include, 
when  applicable:  Implementation  of  equivalent  alternative  controls;  Reduction  and  limitation  of  the 
production; and Isolation and stoppage of equipment, systems, and units.” 

 Item 12.6.1 states: “the rig operator will be responsible for the implementation of corrective actions 
regarding the recommendations made during the risk analysis”. Additionally, item 12.6.3 establishes that 
“the rig operator will be responsible for the documentation and implementation of the corrective actions. 
Regarding modifications or rejection of this implementation, the decisions must be justified”. 

Item  13.2.1  states:  “the  rig  operator  shall  establish  plans  and  procedures  for  inspection,  test  and 
maintenance, in order to seek mechanical integrity of its systems, structures and Operational Safety Critical 
Equipment  and  Systems.  Such  documentation  shall  comply  with  manufacturer’s  recommendations, 
standards and engineering practices”. Moreover, in agreement with this item, the item 13.3.4 from SGSO 
complements that “the rig operator shall assure that Operational Safety Critical Equipment and Systems are 
fully covered by inspection plans, tests and maintenance”. 

 

Lessons learned 

Aiming the continuous improvement of the Operational Safety Management, ANP/SSM identifies the 
 
opportunity  for  enhancing  passive  fire  protection  availability  and  integrity  management  in  offshore 
production units.  

Based  on  the identified deviations,  operators  shall  take  actions  to  verify  the  recommendations  of 
safety  studies  regarding  the  need  for  PFP  installation  and  to  establish  and  implement  inspection  and 
maintenance plans for the installed PFP. Finally, in case of degraded, absent or out of specification PFPs, 
operators shall implement temporary additional mitigating measures and recover the protections, in order 
to restore design conditions. 

For  additional  information  regarding  this  safety  alert,  please  contact  ANP’s  Superintendence  of 

Operational Safety and Environment at sgso@anp.gov.br. 

Contact 

