 ŁUnderstand mechanical integrity programs in your plant, and your role in ensuring that these programs are effective.ŁObserve pipes, vessels, and other equipment when you are working in the plant. Look for stains on the outside of insulated lines and other signs of damaged or corroded equipment. Follow up to make sure that repairs are made.ŁIf you are taking equipment or piping apart, look for evidence of corrosion damage Œfor example, corrosion under insulation, internal corrosion in pipes or other equipment, damage to flanges or valves. ŁWhen replacing pipes, valves, or other equipment, be careful to use the same material of construction.ŁUnderstand the corrosion and erosion corrosion properties of the materials in your plant, and what you must do to minimize corrosion problems.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelŁCorrosionis the deterioration of metal by electro-chemical reaction with substances or microbes in its environment. These substances can be process materials contained in a vessel, pipe, or other equipment, or materials in the outside environment Œfor example, water, salt, or contaminants in the atmosphere. The rusting of steel is an example of corrosion.ŁErosion Corrosionis the degradation of material surface due to mechanical action, often by impinging liquid, abrasion by a slurry, or particles, bubbles, or droplets suspended in fast flowing liquid or gas.ŁCorrosion has been responsible for major losses in the process industries. For example, in 2006, part of a major oil field had to be shut down for several months because of multiple oil spills resulting from severe pipeline corrosion.Mechanical integrity is one of the biggest challenges for an effective process safety management program. Think about it Œin your plant, there may be hundreds of vessels, thousands of feet of pipe, and hundreds of pumps, compressors, instruments, and otherequipment. All of it must be kept in good operating condition toensure safe, reliable, and profitable operation. Management of corrosion and erosion of process piping and equipment must be a major component of any effective mechanical integrity program.The pictures show some examples of corrosion and erosion problems which were identified in plant inspections. (1) and (2)Œexternal corrosion of pipes in a plant; (3) Œclose up of erosion damage to the face of a flange; (4) Œclose up of eroded body and seat of a gate valve; (5) Œerosion damage on the body of a valve.Watch out for corrosion and keep the chemicals inside the equipment!January 2010AIChE ©2010. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Corrosion and ErosionCCPS Sponsors, the Beacon Committee, and volunteer Beacon translators wish all Beacon readers a happy, prosperous and safeNewYear 2010.What can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.Do you know?12345