www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Corrosion under insulation

This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

June 2019

A plant experienced a catastrophic 
piping failure of an 8-inch (200 mm) 
insulated steel line containing 
noncorrosive cracked gas (~ 40% 
ethylene). The incident started as a 
pinhole leak that was detected by 
operators. The pipe failed while the line 
was being isolated and depressurized. 
Fortunately, the line folded as it failed, 
which limited the size of the release. 
There were no injuries.

The line was 30 years old. It was in

• Normal operation at 1 °F (–17 °C)
• Regeneration at 428 °F (220 °C)
• Standby at ambient temperature

a regeneration service where operation alternated among three different temperature conditions:

These changes in operating temperature caused condensation of moisture from the atmosphere on the outside of 

the pipe, and re-evaporation. This is a well-known high-risk situation for corrosion under insulation (CUI). It can 
easily be missed if the mechanical integrity team is not aware of the changing operating conditions.

Reference:  Morey, A. “Corrosion Under Insulation Revisited: Aren’t We About to Finish that Project?” Process Safety Progress 37 (4), pp. 502-505, December 2018.

Did You Know?

What Can You Do?

 Corrosion under insulation (CUI) is external corrosion 

 Understand which equipment in your plant is most 

of pipes and vessels. It can happen when a corrosive 
fluid, including process fluids which have leaked, is 
trapped under insulation or fireproofing and kept in 
continued contact with the outside of pipes or vessels.

 CUI can also result from trapped water from 

precipitation or condensation of atmospheric moisture.

 CUI often occurs in carbon steel that is cold enough for 

water to condense on the external surface.

 CUI occurs most often when the operating temperature 
is between 10 and 350 °F (– 12 and 177 °C) or in cyclic 
service where temperatures go in and out of this range.
 Corrosive liquid may accumulate at the lowest part of 

the piping or vessel, rather than where the leak, spill, or 
condensation occurred.

 Damaged insulation may allow water to enter. The 

insulation jacket is an important layer of protection to 
keep the metal pipe or other equipment dry.

 A common cause of jacket failure is from people 

susceptible to CUI. Some examples include steel pipe, 
pipe in cold or cycling service, and pipe containing a 
corrosive fluid. Your corrosion experts can provide 
information to help you understand CUI in your plant.
 When you walk through the plant, look for damaged 

insulation, jackets, or seals where water can enter. 
These areas should be inspected, and the insulation 
repaired.

 Immediately report signs of any leak that you observe. 

Look for signs of liquid inside the insulation jacket 
such as drips or puddles (even if “only water”), 
discoloration, rust stains, and blistering. Follow up to 
make sure the leak is repaired in a timely manner.

 If insulation is removed during maintenance or repairs, 

use this chance to check the equipment for signs of 
corrosion. Also, remember that the job is not complete 
until the insulation is replaced.

stepping on insulated pipe to reach something.

 Read the February 2005 and January 2014 Beacons for 

 Insulation hides corrosion from view.

other examples of corrosion under insulation. 

Recognize corrosion under insulation hazards!

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, 

Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

