This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

May 2015

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Mechanical Integrity

1

2

In August 2012, a pipe in a Crude Distillation Unit (CDU) in a refinery 
in California ruptured, releasing hot, flammable hydrocarbon process fluid 
(Photo 1). The released material partially vaporized forming a large vapor 
cloud which ignited. The pipe failed due to thinning caused by sulfidation 
corrosion, a common damage mechanism in refineries. Sulfidation 
corrosion failures are of great concern because of a comparatively high 
likelihood of catastrophic failure. This can happen because corrosion 
occurs at a relatively uniform rate over a broad area, so a pipe can get 
progressively thinner until it bursts, rather than a failure starting as a small 
leak at a pit, crack, or local thin area.

In November 2013, a fire erupted after a leak from a pipe containing 
vacuum residue at a CDU in a refinery in Brazil (Photo 2). The leakage 
occurred due to the rupture of a straight section pipe in a pipe rack, near 
the pre-flash tower of the CDU. The investigation determined that the 
pipe section was very thin (less than 1 mm). The specified material for 
this pipe section was an alloy steel, but the actual material was found to 
be carbon steel. This pipe section had been replaced during a maintenance 
shutdown in 1998, and the wrong material of construction was used.

In both of these incidents, the Mechanical Integrity Management System was not successful in detecting or 
replacing deteriorated piping components before failure. In the 2013 incident, the maintenance system did not 
ensure that the correct material of construction was used when the pipe was replaced. More effective 
mechanical integrity and maintenance programs could have prevented both incidents. 

What can you do?

 Immediately report any leak that you discover, no matter how small, and follow up to make sure action is taken.  
 If you are responding to what appears to be a small leak in a large pipe or vessel, consider the possibility that the 
“small” leak is actually caused by a large area of thin or weak metal which could suddenly become a large leak. Plan 
your response to ensure that people are protected if this happens.
 If you are replacing piping or other equipment, make sure that you use the correct material for all replacement parts. 
Follow the Positive Material Identification (PMI) procedures at your facility and verify implementation in the field. 
Perform a 100 percent component inspection of what has been replaced during a turnaround before re-starting.
 Frequent use of leak repair clamps to externally stop process fluid leaks raises questions about effectiveness of a 
mechanical integrity program. These devices are intended to provide a temporary repair while a process continues 
operating until a permanent repair can be made, perhaps during a plant shutdown. When such temporary repairs are 
implemented, follow you plant’s management of change procedures. Be sure that temporary repairs are managed so they 
can be included for permanent repair when planning the next shutdown.
 Understand and make sure that recommendations from your inspection group are implemented in a timely manner.
 An effective management of change (MOC) process is vital to the success of any piping integrity management 
program. Your plant inspection group can anticipate changes in corrosion or other deterioration and change inspection 
schedules and procedures appropriately. Make sure your inspection group is involved in the approval process for changes 
that may affect piping or other equipment integrity.

“You get what you inspect, not what you expect!”

©AIChE 2015. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, 

Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

