 A compressed air tank failed, blowing the bottom off of the tank (1) and sending fragments flying into a concrete wall, puncturing the wall (2). Investigation following the incident revealed several serious problems with the condition of the tank, including severe corrosion and rust at the bottom of the tank (3), where it failed, and an improper weld repair (4) which had been made to the tank at some time in the past. Although the weld repair did not contribute to this incident, itis a symptom of improper maintenance and inspection, and could have caused a tank failure. Fortunately, nobody was in the area when the tank failed, and there were no injuries. Watch out for damaged or corroded equipment!May 2009AIChE ©2009. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Mechanical IntegritySponsored by Sponsored by CCPS Process CCPS Process Safety Incident Safety Incident Database (PSID)Database (PSID)http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.ŁLook at vessels, piping, and other equipment as you walk through your plant, and report anything which appears to be corroded or improperly maintained. Include visual inspection of piping, vessels, compressed gas cylinders, and other equipment in routine safety inspections. Follow up and make surethat problems are corrected.ŁUnderstand the equipment inspection and maintenance program in your plant, and understand your role in ensuring that all activities are completed as required.ŁWhen you do mechanical work that requires removal of insulationfrom equipment, take the opportunity to look at the condition of the equipment and report any corrosion or other problems that you observe. Corrosion under insulation may be hidden, but mechanical work which requires removal of the insulation provides an opportunity to observe problems.ŁMake sure that all welds and other repairs follow all required standards, and meet the original design specifications for the equipment.ŁAssure that all pressure vessels in your plant, including portable tanks and tanks which are a part of ﬁpackaged systemsﬂ(for example, compressors, refrigeration units, compressed air systems, etc.), are included in the plant mechanical integrity inspection program and are being inspected by qualified pressure vessel inspectors. This may include inspection for internal corrosion at an appropriate frequency.ŁMake sure that compressed air tanks and other portable compressed gas cylinders are stored in dry locations to prevent external rust and corrosion.1234