Safety Alert 003 - ANP/SSM 

Flare tower failure due to resonance effect 

 

 

  

The Superintendence of Operational Safety and Environment (ANP/SSM) is issuing 
this safety alert to notify the petroleum and gas industry and other stakeholders about a 
failure mechanism of the flare tower due to excessive vibration caused by hull natural frequency excitation 
coinciding with the flare tower natural frequency. 

What happened? 

The incident that motivated this alert occurred in September 2017 in a floating, production, storage 
and offloading unit (FPSO), after around one year of operation. An excessive flare tower vibration leaded to 
a major crack, circa 950 mm length, in the bracing connected to the forward leg at the flare foundation on 
the hull, leading to the complete shutdown and evacuation of non-essential personnel.  

This flare tower is a fixed stack supported by three main elements, which are reinforced at the base 
by knee braces. The crack occurred at the connection weld of the knee brace to the leg, as well as at doubling 
plate connection of the flare legs on the hull deck, as showed in the picture: 

Double plate 

 

Potential consequences 

Excessive vibration may cause unexpected and catastrophic failure of the structure, leading asset and 

environmental damage and ultimately to human impacts including fatalities and production losses. 

The investigation conducted by the operator identified the following causes of the failure: 

Identified causes 

 

 

 

  Resonance effect due to hull girder natural frequency coinciding with the flare natural frequency at 

a specific draft; 
Inadequate engineering design (knee brace location, doubling plate); 

 
  Excessive stress concentration; 
  Slamming inducing whipping and excitation of the flare tower natural frequency (resonance). 

Therefore, significant amplification and excessive flare movements were observed leading to cracks 

occurring at the weakest part of the structure: 

Resonance  

Wave 
impact load 

Hull girder 
vibration 

Flare tower vibration with 
hull girder natural freq. & 
flare tower natural freq. 

 

The  Root  Cause  Analysis  performed  by  the  operator  confirmed  that  the  severe  conditions  and 
dynamic  amplification  due to  nonlinear  response  (whipping  effect)  would  lead  to  a  flare tower  structure 
reduced fatigue life down to couple of months. 

Regulatory Framework 

According to SGSO item 10.3 (a): “… The Operator of the Installation must establish a system in a way 

that: 

 - all aspects that could introduce risk to Operational Safety are duly considered in the Installation project and 
in subsequent revisions of the design, construction, installation and deactivation/abandonment phases;”.  

Additionally, also in agreement with SGSO item 10.3 (c):  “… The Operator of the Installation must 

establish a system in a way that:  

- means of altering the project are established when aspects that could introduce risk to Operational Safety 
are encountered during the construction and installation phases.”  

Lessons learned 

ANP  recommends  ensuring  during  engineering  phase  of  FPSO  units  that  all  structural  natural 
frequencies  are  separated,  including  hull  natural  frequency  for  all  draft  condition  to  avoid  significant 
dynamic amplification and fatigue sensitivity.  

 
Additionally,  it  is  recommended  that  all  FPSO  units  in  operation  are  checked  to  ensure  that  flare 
tower natural frequency is sufficiently away from the hull natural frequency for all cargo conditions. The 
identified risks shall be managed in accordance with operational safety management practices. 

 

 

 

For  additional  information  regarding  this  Safety  Alert,  please  contact  ANP’s  Superintendence  of 

Operational Safety and Environment at sgso@anp.gov.br. 

Contact 

