 

Safety Alert 005 - ANP/SSM 

Well Barrier Elements Failure 

The  Operational  Safety  and  Environment  Superintendence  is  issuing  this  safety 
alert to notify the oil and gas industry and other stakeholders about the occurrence of 
well integrity loss due to structural failure.  

What happened? 

Throughout  an  offshore  1454  m  water  depth  non-natural  flow  well  abandonment  intervention  in 
Campos Basin, an oil leak around subsea equipment was observed while a DHSV test was attempted. The 
through tubing operation with slick line/wireline to drift the tubing using lead impression block, down hole 
video (DHV) and caliper multifinger proved a tubing collapsed above DHSV region, characterizing failure in 
the well barrier envelope. 

During  a  hydrate  dissociation  operation,  the  pack-off  disconnected 

leading  to  pressure 
communication  between  annuluses,  causing  chain  collapse  reaction  of  16”  surface  casing,  13  3/8” 
production casing and tubing, resulting in loss of well integrity. The facts corroborating this hypothesis are: 
(i) the sudden temperature drop recorded in PDG (Permanent Downhole Gauge), (ii) the pressure indicated 
by the PT-A sensor was equivalent to the estimated external pressure.  

Due to  the lack of direct well access to carry out abandonment operations, the Operator created an 
ERT (Emergency Response Team) aiming to establish the permanent well barrier elements – WBEs - for well 
abandonment by constructing an interception well. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 – Lead impression block with lateral mark 

Figure 2 – DHV image 

Considering  the  hypothesis  of  natural-flow  well,  the  WBEs  failure  could  result  in  an  uncontrolled 

inflow of formation fluids to seabed, with consequent major environmental damage. 

Potential Consequences 

Identified causes 

The immediate cause for the failure was a collapse chain reaction in the surface casing, production 
casing and tubing above DHSV, due to pack-off failure. The last was caused by Annulus A exposure to gas lift 
line pressure during a diesel displacement operation to prevent hydrates formation in the production line. 
For this displacement, it was necessary to open the W2 valve in the subsea christmas tree. 

 

The figure below shows the foreseen scheme for diesel circulation, with M2 valve closed: 

 
Due to an operational error, the W2 valve was opened without previous closing of M2 valve. Thus, 
there was unintended pressure connection between the gas lift line and Annulus A, which was depressurized. 
Subsequently,  the  pack-off  that  isolates  the  Annulus  B  and  Annulus  A  failed,  communicating  the  two 
annuluses, which equalized the pressures: 

This pressure equalization led to casing collapse due to a loading that generated a stress level above 

 

The  Operator  incident  investigation  identified  the  following  root  causes  (linked  to  management 

the design limits. 

system): 

Use  of  inadequate  design  requirements,  since  the  pack-off  failure  mode  induced  by  heat 

 
loading was not analyzed during well construction (lack of additional locking); and  

 

 

 
Failure in the management of changes process, applied to changes in design requirements 
during the well production phase and, consequently, in the evaluation and update of the operational 
envelope.  

No root causes were identified related to operational discipline, even though the sequence of valves 
maneuver was determinant for the accident. It was considered that the process was inadequate due to the 
lack of knowledge about the operational envelope. If the restriction for depressurization of Annulus A was 
known, the operational procedure would have considered specific safeguards to the impact of WBE loss in 
case of Annulus A depressurization, as well as it would emphasize the importance of correct operational 
sequence to WBE integrity assurance.   

Additionally, the Operator did not point out the well handover as a cause, because even if they had 
done this procedure, the inputs still would be insufficient, since changes in design requirements were not 
extended to wells in the operational phase. 

Lessons Learned 

Establish systematic loading analysis prior to well annulus-depressurizing operations, in order 

Use  supplementary  pack-off  locking  devices,  in  order  to  increase  design  reliability  and 

 
to verify pack-off stress.  
 
robustness. 

 

Regulatory Framework 

The following items of Well Integrity Management System (WIMS) Technical Regulation, attached to 

ANP Resolution n. 46/2016, are related to the incident: 

Item  10.1.2.3  of  Management  Practice  10  –  Stages  of  Well  Life  Cycle:  “Ensure  that  each  part  and 
equipment  that  compose  the  well  are  sized  to  support  design  maximum  loads,  heat  effects,  chemical 
composition of reservoir fluids, wear to which they will be submitted as well as the combined effects, during 
all stages of the Well Life Cycle.” 

Item 16.2.1.1: “Ensure that the management of changes process comprises: 

i) Updating documents affected by change; and  

j) Training and/or communicating to whole workforce impacted by changes”. 

Additionally, the following requirements must be observed: 

Item  8.4.1  of  Management Practice  8 –  Information  and Documentation  Management:  “Operator 

must have, during all Stages of Well Life Cycle, updated Well Handover documentation (…)”. 

Item 10.2.2.6 of Management Practice 10 – Well Life Cycle Stages: “Operator must ensure that Well 

Handover documentation is updated and delivered to the responsible for the next stage of Well Life Cycle”. 

For additional information regarding this safety alert, please contact ANP’s Operational Safety and 

Environment Superintendency at incidentes@anp.gov.br. 

Contact 

