 

 

 Safety Alert 001 - ANP/SSM 

CO2 Stress Corrosion Cracking (SCC-CO2) 

 

 

The Superintendence of Operational Safety and Environment is issuing this safety alert to notify the petroleum 
and gas industry and other stakeholders about a corrosion mechanism known as CO2 Stress Corrosion Cracking (SCC). 

What happened? 

An accident of this nature was reported to this Superintendence in January 2017. It involved a gas injection 
flexible pipe failure in its second year of operation, although the manufacturer had evaluated its service life as 20 
years. 

Without any previous records of such accident, classification is still on its first stages, bringing new challenges 

to pre-salt exploration. Researchers, however, have already identified SCC-CO2 causes, as stated below. 

CO2  Stress Corrosion Cracking may cause  unexpected  and catastrophic failure of a flexible  pipe, leading to 

production losses and environmental accidents. 

Potential consequences 

Causes 

  Environment containing H2O and CO2; 
  Static, cyclic or residual stress on pipe; 
  Time; 
  Susceptible material. 

According to the operator, the most likely reason for CO2 existence within the annulus in such a concentration 
enough to activate the mechanism is gas permeation across pressure armor layer. Other possible but less likely causes 
could be failure in the internal seal connector or fluid injection with CO2 level above design limit. 

Concerning the presence of water in the annular, the most likely cause is external sheath damage, which could 
have allowed water inflow. There is also a minor possibility of water having entered the annular through the connector. 

Regarding tensile armor’s stress, there were residual and operational stress enough to trigger SCC mechanism. 
Besides,  the  tensile  armor  wires  material  was  susceptible  to  environment-assisted  fracture  (nucleation  and 
propagation) under the design operational conditions (CO2, stress and water) within the exposed time. 

ANP will share research results (CO2 stress and fugacity envelopes) as soon as they become known, for better 

risk definition associated to SCC-CO2 occurrence in subsea systems. 

For additional information regarding this safety alert, please contact ANP’s Superintendence of Operational 

Safety and Environment at sgss@anp.gov.br. 

Lessons learned 

Contact 

