 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and  
Environmental Enforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

Safety
Alert 

Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux
(504) 736-2560

BSEE 

Safety Alert Number: 299 
31 January 2012 
 

Failure to Properly Bleed Tubing Hanger Void Results in Injury 

 
Prior to well temporary abandonment operations, the surface controlled subsurface safety valve 
had been isolated and replaced with a subsurface controlled safety valve.  During the 
abandonment operation, pressure was bled off the top of the wellhead and the casings, and the 2-
7/8 inch tubing was cut below the wellhead when the injured person (IP) began backing the 
tubing hanger pins off the tubing hanger during wellhead dismantling.  During removal of the 
fifth tubing hanger pin the entire tubing hanger pin and packing nut were ejected from the tubing 
hanger head, striking the IP on the shin.       
 
A BSEE investigation revealed the following: 
 

  Based upon wellhead drawings it was determined that it was not necessary to remove the 

tubing hanger pins from the tubing hanger in order to dismantle the wellhead.  

  The IP did not isolate the packing nut to prevent its turning with the stem when removing 

the pin. 

  The IP was standing in direct line of the pin and nut assembly’s ejection point. 
  There were no supporting documents to indicate that the subsurface controlled safety 

valve control line was bled to zero prior to removing the tubing hanger pins.    

  The wellhead bleeder plugs were not used to check for trapped pressure in the void space 

of the tubing hanger adapter prior to the IP removing the tubing hanger pin and nut 
assembly.   

  During proper wellhead dismantling in the shop, using the bleeder valve tool on the 

tubing head adaptor void space, trapped control line hydraulic pressure was confirmed at 
the seal sleeve located at the top of the tubing hanger. 

  During the shop wellhead dismantling, the ¼ inch tubing to safety valve assembly fitting 

was found to have gouged threads on both the fitting and nut, and the ferrule was not 
fully compressed on the ¼ inch tubing.  These initial installation defects allowed 
hydraulic fluid pressure to enter the void space.     

  This trapped hydraulic fluid pressure in the tubing head and tubing head adaptor ejected 
the tubing hanger pin and nut since they were improperly backed off of its compression 
ring.   

  There was a lack of supervision to ensure that all workers were properly trained on the 

  The Job Safety Analysis (JSA) failed to recognize all hazards associated with the 

wellhead dismantling procedure. 

wellhead dismantling. 

 
Therefore, the BSEE recommends to the Lessees, Operators, and their contractors that: 
 

  Proper supervision should be employed to ensure personnel dismantling a wellhead are 

properly trained, and that proper bleed-down tools are used to verify any tubing head 
void space has been properly bled.   

  The JSA should recognize wellhead dismantling hazards; e.g., the tubing head void space 

trapped pressure hazards, position of personnel, etc.    

  When working on hanger pins, the operator should ensure a backup wrench is used on the 

packing nut so the nut does not back out with the pin.  
It is of the utmost importance to recognize that just because the wellhead reflects zero 
pressure, there could be other wellhead component void areas that can store trapped 
pressure.   

  When in doubt during wellhead dismantling operations, consult with the wellhead 

manufacturer representative. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  

 

www.bsee.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Safety-Alerts.aspx  

--BSEE--GOMR-- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas 
industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss.  It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such 
an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

