 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 335 
14 May 2018  

 

 
 

 
 

 Failure to Mitigate Known Hazards Leads to Kick 

                         Contact: Jason Mathews  
 
         Phone: (504) 731-1496 

 

 

 

 

On November 12, 2017, a platform rig was performing abandonment work when the rig 
encountered pressure below a bridge plug during a milling operation. This pressure 
propelled the work string out of the hole, causing damage to the drill pipe, derrick, and top 
drive. This failure allowed for potential catastrophic consequences to personnel and the 
environment.  

 
 

       

                           

 

 

Buckled pipe leans against rotary table (left) and derrick (right) after being ejected from well 

 
 
The abandonment operation included drilling out a surface plug, removing the 
intermediate casing to 1000', and setting an intermediate plug and surface plug. After the 
surface plug was set, the well would then be permanently abandoned by cutting and 
pulling the remaining casings at least 15' below the mudline.  
 
The incident occurred while milling out the 9-5/8” bridge plug after drilling through the 
surface cement plug as part of abandonment operations. The bridge plug was being 
milled using a mud motor with the annular preventer in the closed position and flow being 
taken through the open choke. After milling three inches of the bridge plug, the pressure 
below the bridge plug rapidly forced the bridge plug and drill string 15 ft. out of the hole; 
buckling the pipe and causing extensive damage to the top drive and derrick. Following 
the incident, the pumps were immediately stopped and a flow check was performed. With 
confirmation that the well was not flowing, the crew shut down operations to evaluate the 
situation.  
 
The incident investigation found the immediate cause to be pressure below the bridge 
plug, which exceeded the weight of the work string, consequently forcing the pipe out of 
the hole. There were multiple contributing factors that could have prevented the incident 
from occurring:  

 

-  A pre-job assessment was completed and presented during the program kickoff 

meeting. Despite identifying the risk of gas beneath the bridge plug, a pilot mill to 
mitigate the risk was not used.  

-  Uncertainty around milling large bridge plugs at shallow depths, as well as 

encountering gas below bridge plugs were discussed at the pre-spud meeting, yet 
no mitigation techniques were included in the well program or communicated to the 
field outside of being aware of the possible hazard. 

-  The Job Safety Analysis recognized possible hazards related to gas below the 

plug, yet no recommendations were provided to eliminate or reduce the likelihood 
of these potential hazards. 

 
 
 
 Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following options:  
 

  Ensure that completed hazards analysis and mitigations for the recognized 

hazards are communicated to the personnel conducting the operation.  

  Reinforce with personnel that a Job Safety Analysis should not only identify 

potential hazards, but should provide mitigations to reduce or eliminate the risks 
identified.  

  Employ methods to identify and safely relieve trapped pressure on the backside of 

any well barriers prior to releasing a barrier latching mechanism or slips. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

