BSEE 

U.S. Department of the Interior
Bureau of Safety and  
Environmental Enforcement 

Safety Alert No. 313 
31 July 2014 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact: Phillip Couvillion 
(979) 238-8137 

Snake Grip Failure on Drill Line 

While conducting stringing down block operations on a platform rig in the Gulf of Mexico, a 
member of a four man work crew was struck with the 1 3/8” drill line when it failed to remain in 
the snake grip.  The Injured Person (IP) was manning the hydraulic drill line spool winch control 
at the time of the incident. As the drill line cable attached to the snake grip was going through the 
last deadman sheave in the crown block, an “all stop” was given by another member of the work 
crew when he noticed the drill line cable coming out of the snake grip. Approximately ten to 
thirty seconds after the “all stop” was given, the drill line cable came free from the snake grip 
and fell toward the hydraulic drill line spool winch striking the IP on the left shoulder and right 
hip. The IP was put into a litter and lowered to the main deck, where he was treated by the Rig 
Medic. He was then transported to the closest hospital for treatment. 

An investigation by BSEE concluded the following factors contributed to the incident: 

•

It was determined that the drill line cable was not properly degreased before being
inserted into snake grip.

• The proper clamping method recommended by the manufacturer’s specifications was not

utilized for the snake grip. Instead, manila rope and duct tape were used to secure the
snake grip which may have prevented the drill line cable and snake grip from going
through the block smoothly and contributing to the injury incident.

BSEE recommends the following when installing snake grips on to the drill line cable: 

• Assure the manufacturer’s specifications and instructions for use of a snake grip are

• Verify the correct sized snake grip is utilized for actual drill line diameter during

followed completely.

operations.

•  Drill line cables must be thoroughly degreased before insertion into snake grip. 
•  Use the proper manufacturer recommended clamps and tools to secure the snake grip to 

the cable.  

•  Maintain a safe operating speed on the drill line winch to ensure safety observers have 

adequate time to relay any and all safety concerns during operation. 

•  Be assertive in personnel placement while conducting this type operation.  When 

possible, keep personnel clear of drop zones of all the overhead equipment and work. 

 

NOTE:  

•  The International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC) issued Safety Alert #11-20 
titled, “DRILL LINE PULLS THROUGH WIRE ROPE SNAKE WHILE STRINGING 
BLOCKS.”  Safety Alert #11-20 was issued August 2011.  This Safety Alert addressed 
the importance of properly degreasing the wire cable prior to utilizing the snake grip 
equipment.   

•  Snake Grips are also known as: ‘Chinese Finger Locks’ or ‘Socks’. 
•  Below are examples of the proper banding and taping applications. 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry 
of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also contains 
recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on 
the Outer Continental Shelf. 

—BSEE— 

 www.bsee.gov 

 
 

 

