SAFETYALERT

Safety Alert No. 338   
3 AUGUST 2018  
 

 
 

                       Contact: Jason Mathews 
 
         Phone: (504) 731-1496 

 

Pressure Safety Element (Rupture Disk) Failures 

Ruptured burst disk from a BSEE 2012 
Panel Investigation Report.

Burst disk held against bright sky shows 
holes (small white dots). The holes were 
found during a recent BSEE inspection.  

Recent BSEE inspections in the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) have found Pressure Safety Elements 
(PSEs), also called “burst disks” or “rupture disks,” that were ruptured or severely corroded. 

A 2012 BSEE Panel Investigation Report from the Pacific Region called attention to PSEs not 
being properly inspected and maintained.  The Panel Investigation Team concluded that the 
failure of a PSE on a surge tank initiated the release of hydrocarbons into the flare header, 
resulting in oil being inadvertently released into the ocean via the disposal tube and the flare 
stack.  Employees who had worked on the platform for several years could not recall ever 
inspecting the PSE. 

Ruptured burst disk from a BSEE 2012 Panel 
Investigation Report 

BSEE inspections continue to reveal instances where PSEs are found to be hazardous.  In 
the past year, BSEE inspections in the GOM have found additional instances where PSEs 
were ruptured or severely corroded and often without equipment tags.  During one inspection, 
four PSE tags were missing or illegible, and three PSEs had incorrect burst pressures 
recorded in the facility records. 

In rare instances, PSEs are permitted by regulations.  It should be noted that PSEs installed 
as operator-use-only devices should also be maintained so that no harm to safety or the 
environment occurs. 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 

·  Review this Safety Alert with all personnel responsible for inspecting PSEs to call 

attention to the importance of properly maintaining critical equipment and the 
importance of frequent mechanical integrity program assessments to ensure 
effectiveness. 

·  Operators are encouraged to check the integrity of the PSEs currently installed on 

their facilities to determine if immediate repair/replacement is needed. 

·  Check the equipment tags on all PSEs: 

o  Tags should be securely attached, legible and up-to-date.  These tags are a 

regulatory requirement under 30 CFR 250.841(a), 250.851(a)(3) and the 
ASME Boiler code (as incorporated by reference). 

o  Tags should list the equipment ID, burst pressure and disk manufacture date. 
o  Verify tags against facility records. 
o  Take a photo or rubbing of new tags before installation to keep on file, along 

with manufacturer’s documentation. 

·  Visually inspect rupture disks at intervals recommended by the manufacturer, at a 

minimum. 

o 

Inspection intervals may depend on service conditions, pressure and 
temperature cycling, vibration, and likelihood of corrosion. 

o  During inspection, keep the disk in the holder, if possible.  Some disks (e.g. 

pre-torqued rupture disk holders) must be replaced if the disk is removed. 

o  Create or revise policies and schedules for burst disk inspections and 

maintenance, including Safety and Environmental Management System 
(SEMS) mechanical integrity documents. 

·  Monitor process conditions, including meter volumes, for evidence of ruptured or 

leaking PSEs.  In some applications, rupture disks may burst without obvious 
indication to operators. 

o  Monitor vent and flaring flow rates for unusual increases. 

·  Consider replacing rupture disk after a specific length of service, even if they appear 

to be serviceable.  Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

·  Pay close attention to the manufacturer’s instructions when installing rupture disks. 

Before installation: 

o  Check new rupture disks for damage, corrosion and paint overspray. 
o  Verify correct disk orientation per manufacturer’s guidance. 
o  Ensure that the rupture disk material is compatible with the service. 
o 
Isolate, shutdown, blowdown and/or lock-out/tag-out as necessary. 

·  Store spare rupture disks carefully to prevent damage. 

o  Do not stack heavy objects on top of rupture disks. 
o  Avoid paint overspray as it can increase the burst pressure. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.

