SAFETY ALERT 

Safety Alert No. 341 
2 October 2018 

Contact: Jason Mathews 
Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Fired Vessel Hazards Identified by BSEE in Risk-Based Inspections 

The  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  recently  conducted  a 
review of recent compliance and incident data to identify safety trends throughout the Gulf 
of  Mexico.  The  analysis  pointed  to  a  potential  risk  associated  with  fired  vessels.  From 
January 2016 to May 2018, 17 fired vessel incidents were reported to BSEE by 12 unique 
operators.  Further,  BSEE  issued  76  fired  vessel-related  incidents  of  non-compliance 
(INCs)  during  the  29-month  period.  To  reduce  the  likelihood  of  future  incidents  and 
compliance  issues,  BSEE  developed  a  Performance  Based  Risk  Inspection  (PBRI) 
protocol and conducted targeted inspections of fired vessels on 27 production platforms in 
the Gulf of Mexico Region over a two-day period in July 2018. 

Sight Glass Gauge Cock found partially open during a Performance Based Risk Inspection 

Overall,  the  integrity  of  the  majority  of  fired  vessels  inspected  during  the  PBRI  was 
commendable;  however,  there  were  noticeable  gaps  on  a  few  platforms  that  warrant 
attention to prevent or mitigate uncontrolled releases of hydrocarbons, toxic substances, 
or  other  materials  that  may  cause  environmental  or  safety  consequences.  After 
completing the inspections, BSEE reviewed the results and conducted additional reviews 
of  Safety  and  Environmental  Management  System  (SEMS)  specific  items  (e.g.,  fired 
vessel  inspection  records,  operating  procedures,  competency  of  production  operators, 
JSAs). The findings were as follows: 

· BSEE found that fired vessel operating procedures were not available to all
personnel involved in the equipment operations examined during the PBRI.
Additionally, essential instructions for conducting safe and environmentally sound
activities failed to include some normal and emergency operations of fired vessels.

· BSEE determined that operators are not consistently inspecting gauge cock valves

to make sure they are functioning properly and remaining in the correct
status/position. (See BSEE Safety Bulletin No. 007)

· BSEE concluded that a majority of the inspected operators do not perform

documented inspections/reviews beyond regulatory safety device testing of the
vessel – specifically, monitoring glycol sample analysis.

· BSEE found the majority of the inspected facilities had no method to address, or
failed to specify in their maintenance plans, when the fuel gas filters are changed
on fired vessels.

· The inspections suggest multiple operators are not in compliance with 30 CFR

250.876, which requires operators to have a qualified third-party remove and
inspect, and repair or replace, as needed, the fire tube for tube-type heaters that
are equipped with either automatically controlled natural or forced draft burners
installed in either atmospheric or pressure vessels that heat hydrocarbons and/or
glycol. BSEE began enforcing this regulation on September 7, 2018.

· BSEE identified multiple facilities where the integrity of the flame arrestor and

spark arrestor could not be easily inspected, the frequency of inspections was not
understood by facility personnel, or there was no documentation of inspections.

· Operators’ inspections and maintenance of fire suppression/fighting systems were
overwhelmingly in compliance with applicable regulations; however, consideration
should be given to the location of deluge systems and fire suppression equipment.

· The facilities associated with the PBRI had minimal issues with excessive

temperatures. In fact, most observations made by inspectors indicated high
temperature areas were well insulated.

· BSEE determined temperature safety element (TSE) coverage on offshore facilities

associated with the PBRI were appropriate and in good condition.

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 

· Review fired vessel operating procedures and verify they are accessible to all

employees involved in the operations; review operating procedures at the conclusion
of specified periods and as often as necessary to ensure they reflect current and
actual practices, including any changes made to the operation; and ensure changes
to the procedures are documented and communicated to responsible personnel.

· Review gauge cock valves to ensure they are equipped with an automatic ball check

shutoff, in accordance with API RP 14J 3.3.2, to help prevent/mitigate rapid loss of
fluid due to accidental glass breakage. Also, operators should ensure that personnel
are familiar with, and trained on, the status/position of gauge cock valve assemblies.

· Develop and implement written operating procedures that define the process for

sampling pH and include the frequency of that sampling and the documentation of
each inspection/sampling. Additionally, operators should periodically sample glycol
and replace or filter it, as appropriate, especially when glycol is used as a heat
transfer media without circulation or filtering. Recommendations from the equipment
and glycol vendors/manufactures should be incorporated into maintenance and
testing procedures.

·  Review fired vessel quality assurance/mechanical integrity procedures along with 

the vessel manufacturer's recommendations for fuel gas filter maintenance. If gaps 
are identified during the operator’s review, the operator should ensure that 
inspections and tests meet the manufacturers' recommendations. 

·  Verify compliance with 30 CFR 250.876. 
· 

Inspect the integrity of fired vessels and correct any deficiencies associated with 
equipment and systems prior to further use. 

·  Review the difficulty of flame arrestor and spark arrestor inspections, and develop 
facility-specific protocols to ensure the integrity of the arrestors, create protocols to 
document all inspections, and ensure that facility personnel are knowledgeable of 
the inspection frequencies. 

·  Review the layout of the facility and fired vessels and determine if the required 
number and type of portable and semi-portable fire extinguishers and/or deluge 
systems are available and in compliance with 33 CFR 145, 30 CFR 250.859(a) 
and/or 30 CFR 250.860. 

·  Review the location and condition of temperature hazards signs and ensure paints 

on high temperature vessels are appropriate. 

·  Even when TSEs are properly installed and in compliance, operators should further 

evaluate the appropriateness of TSE installations below vessels or skids. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.

