SAFETY ALERT 

Safety Alert No. 345 
25 January 2019   

 
 

 
 

 
 

                     Contact: Jason Mathews 
       

           Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Sprag Brake Clutch Failure Leads to Near Miss 

On 13 October 2018, while lifting a construction lay 
down  box  (2500  lbs)  from  a  motor  vessel  with  the 
platform  crane  auxiliary  line,  the  crane  operator 
proceeded  to  raise  the  load.  When  the  load  was 
approximately  6  feet  off  of  the  deck,  the  winch 
failed  resulting  in  the  load  free  falling  back  to  the 
deck  of  the  boat.  The  winch  continued  to  unspool 
after  the  load  hit  the  deck  causing  the  rigging  to 
also  fall  to  the  deck.  A  deckhand  on  the  motor 
vessel  was  able  to  avoid  the  falling  load.  There 

Figure 1: The replacement winch. This winch is 
similar to the one that was involved in the incident. 

were  no  injuries  to  personnel  or  harm  to  the 
environment as a result of the incident. 

The  winch  was  removed  from  service  by  the  crane  mechanic  and  sent  to  a  3rd  party 
facility to be pull tested, brake tested and disassembled. During testing, it was found that 
it would randomly fail to hold the load when the load was released and then pulled again. 
A  full  quarterly  inspection  of  the  crane  had  been  completed  with  no  problems  the  week 
before the incident. 

Figure 2: The disassembled sprag brake clutch 

When disassembled, it was found that the sprag brake clutch was not as tight and rigid as 
normal and would randomly slip in certain positions. After disassembly, the sprag clutch 
was  found  to  have  abnormal  marks  on  the  outer  and  inner  surface  of  the  sprag 
components potentially caused by shock loading and/or faulty components. 

A representative of the crane manufacturer stated that identical or similar components are 
widely used on cranes in the Gulf of Mexico. 

Additional  analysis  of  the  failed  components  is  being  conducted  by  the  crane 
manufacturer  –  depending  on  the  results,  testing  and  inspection  procedures  may  be 
revised. 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 

·  Look for warning signs of a sprag brake clutch malfunction (e.g. slipping after the 
winch stops). Crane operators should report any abnormal behavior to mechanics 
and facility management. 

·  Verify control mechanisms including brakes and clutches for proper operation in 

compliance with API RP 2D C.4.1 (6th edition) and manufacturers recommendations 
during pre-use, monthly, quarterly, and annual inspections. 

·  Winches should be periodically disassembled and all wear items should be 

inspected for damage. Typical inspection intervals are one to five years, and may 
vary depending on frequency of use. Refer to the manufacturer’s recommendations 
and applicable industry codes such as API RP 2D (Section C.4.1). Consider ASME 
Spec B30.5-2004 (chapter 5-2) for guidance. 

· 

If you do not have records of the last winch disassembly and the winch is over five 
years old, limit use of the winch and schedule a disassembly and inspection soon. 

·  Conduct periodic oil sampling and analysis. 

o  Record and trend results over time – high levels or sudden increases in iron 

contaminants may indicate serious mechanical problems. Disassembly of the 
winch may be required to determine the cause. 

o  Oil should be changed regularly, typically annually. Use only the oil type 

specified by the manufacturer. Improper oil may lead to brake clutch slippage. 

·  Conduct a winch warm-up procedure at crane start-up to help prevent brake 

slippage. This is especially important during cold weather. 

·  Avoid shock loading the crane. If you suspect that a crane has been shock loaded, 

safely lower the load, remove the crane from service and follow the manufacturer 
recommended inspection procedures to verify that the crane has not been damaged. 

·  Review all communications and safety bulletins from crane manufacturers and share 

them with your crane operators, mechanics and riggers. 

-- BSEE -- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.

