 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BSEE 

U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 

Safety 
Alert 

Safety Alert No. 309 
Date: 19 March 2014 

Contact Person: Jim Hail 
Phone Number: (979) 238-8140 

Misuse of Beam Clamps as Ground 

The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has identified a potential safety 
issue in regard to the use of beam clamps on many Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) facilities.  It is 
determined that the use of beam clamps as grounding conductors could potentially cause fires 
and present electrical hazards to personnel. 

Many OCS facilities are utilizing beam clamps as current carrying external ground to meet the 
requirements in the API RP 14F.  The beam clamps are approved by Underwriters Laboratories 
(UL) and Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) to mount and support conduit and cable 
from structural beams, not as temporary or permanent external equipment grounding conductors. 
Example below: 

API RP 14F & 14FZ § 6.10.3.1 states:  “Grounding of electrical equipment on fixed and floating 
offshore petroleum facilities in a positive manner is of particular importance because personnel 
standing on steel decks or in contact with steel framing present a low impedance path to ground, 
effectively grounded. In addition, the dampness and salt spray contribute to the breakdown of 
insulation and to the possibility of leakage on the surface of insulators and similar devices. On 
platforms with wooden or concrete decks, equipment-grounding conductors should be installed 
between electrical equipment and a grounding network. It is recommended that all metal 
equipment, such as buildings, skids, and vessels be grounded to the steel structure or grounding 
network. Exposed, noncurrent-carrying metal parts of fixed equipment that may become 
energized because of any condition shall be grounded. Equipment that is welded to the structure 
or deck is considered to be adequately grounded. The physical contact obtained when equipment 
is bolted to a steel structure is not necessarily an adequate effective ground because of paint and 
possible corrosion. Exposed, noncurrent-carrying metal parts of portable electrical equipment 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

shall be grounded through a conductor in the supply cable to the grounding pole in the 
receptacle.” 

These grounding jumpers do not meet the requirements in API RP 14F/API RP 14FZ. 

API RP 14F & 14FZ both make a clear requirement that any equipment that has exposed, 
noncurrent-carrying metal parts that may become energized because of any condition shall be 
grounded. In this requirement, it is clear that during a fault condition this grounding means must 
be capable of reliably conducting the ground fault current back to the source of electrical power 
to activate or trip the electrical circuit protective device. To further clarify, if the equipment is 
not electrically powered and the metal parts associated with that equipment become energized 
due to no association with electrically operated equipment, controls, devices, or lighting, then the 
requirement for approved current carrying conductors, lugs, terminals, etc. should not apply. 

(Exothermic weld) 

(Bolted connection) 

Operators, as well as contractors, are advised to review your facilities in comparison with these 
best practices and guidelines. 

—BSEE— 

www.bsee.gov 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an 
incident on the Outer Continental Shelf.

 

