SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 324 
April 6, 2017  
 

 
 

 
 

 

           Contact: Jason Mathews  
           Phone: (504) 731-1496 

 
 

 

 
 

 

Serious Incidents Associated with Pipe Racking Systems 

 
Multiple safety incidents have occurred with rig automatic pipe racking systems.  These incidents 
involved failures of fingerboard latches and guide head claws to open or close properly.  The 
failures allowed unsecured pipe stands to become potentially lethal hazards.   
 

 

 

  6 May 2012: While spinning out during a trip, a failure of communication between the 

driller and assistant driller led the driller to unlatch and retract the block, unaware that the 
rollers on the guide head claws were not closed.  This allowed the pipe stand to fall across 
the derrick.   
 

  20 Oct 2015: While tripping casing, a spotter verified the fingerboard latches were open 
and gave verbal instructions to the assistant driller to retract the landing string from the 
fingerboard.  Due to a pressure leak in the pipe racking system, a fingerboard latch closed 
before the pipe was retracted, causing the pipe to bend until the lower guide head claw 
broke.  The pipe then recoiled, fatally striking the spotter. 
 

  20 Mar 2016: While transferring stands between fingerboards, an assistant driller loaded a 

4½-inch pipe into the 6 5/8-inch finger. The pipe failed to fully land causing the display to 
indicate that the slot was not populated by a stand.  The assistant driller failed to notice the 
anomaly, and selected the same slot for the next stand.  When the latches opened the first 
stand fell from the fingerboard. 
 

  9 Oct 2016: During a trip, drill pipe was racked and the fingerboard latches were visually 

confirmed to be closed.  As the assistant driller retracted the racker arms, the upper guide 
head claws failed to release from the drill pipe causing the stand to pull against the upper 

fingerboard latch, shearing it from the fingerboard.  This caused the fingerboard latch to 
break, fall, and strike the drill floor in the red zone.  

 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators perform a full inspection of their automatic pipe 
racking system before using the equipment on their next well.    BSEE encourages the operators to: 

  contact the manufacturers of their automatic pipe racking systems to check for product 

bulletins or safety alerts issued by the manufacturer to assure that their systems are being 
operated and maintained as required. 
 review their training program and work instructions for their pipe racking system to assure 
that all rig floor personnel have received up to date instructions on how to operate this 
equipment safely and remain alert to possible mechanical malfunctions.    

 
Operators should also consider the following options:  
 

Installing sensors on guide head claws with a type of interactive software that allows 
operators to verify claw position at a control panel and automatically prevents movement of 
the guide head when guide head claws are not in the correct position. 
 
Installing sensors on the fingerboard latches with a type of interactive software that allows 
operators to verify latch position at a control panel and automatically prevent movement of 
the guide head when fingerboard latches are not in the correct position. 
 
Installing low pressure sensors that provide notification of an out of range condition or that 
automatically prevents movement of the guide head when low pneumatic pressure is 
detected at the fingerboard latch pistons. 
 
Installing strategically placed cameras near the pipe racking system for operator verification 
of the connection from multiple angles.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

