 

 

 
 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

Safety Alert No. 351 
29 May 2019  

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

       
       

 
 

Contact: Jason Mathews  
Phone: (504) 731-1496 

BSEE Identifies Rig Operations Hazards 

during Risk Based Inspections 

BSEE Inspectors conducting Rig Operations Hazards Performance Based Risk Inspection 

The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement recently conducted a review of 2016 
through 2018 compliance and incident data to identify safety trends throughout the Gulf of 
Mexico. The analysis pointed to a potential risk associated with rig operations. During the 
time frame reviewed, one fatality occurred and other high-potential injuries were associated 
with  rig  floor  equipment.  Due  to  the  recent  events  and  their  associated  severity,  BSEE 
developed a unique Performance Based Risk Inspection (PBRI) protocol that focused on 
reducing  the  likelihood  of  similar  incidents  and  compliance  issues  Gulf-wide.  BSEE 
inspected 11 rigs in the Gulf of Mexico over a multiday period.  
 
At the completion of the inspections, BSEE reviewed the results and conducted additional 
reviews on Safety and Environmental Management System specific items, e.g., personnel 
competency,  identified  safe  zones,  communication  between  Operators  and  Contractors, 
and short-service employees (SSEs). BSEE concluded: 
 
 

•  The interactions between the operators and contractors occur frequently enough to 

allow for discussions of responsibilities, work scope, and hazard and risk 
mitigation. However, the process for pre-spuds, morning calls, and field 
engagement meetings are not defined and seldom documented. 

•  Most of the emergency response and evacuation drills, excluding spill drills, are 

conducted regularly, but operators and contractors are not performing analyses or 
critiqing each drill to identify and correct weaknesses.  

•  A wide array of policies are in place to manage SSEs , but the policies (1) were not 
understood by offshore rig management, (2) did not require identification of SSEs, 
and (3) did not set a requirement on the number of SSEs working on location at one 
time.  

•  The majority of operators and contractors had Fitness for Service programs, but 

there was a lack of evidence to support management’s commitment to fatigue and 
fitness for duty programs, nor were the programs fully implemented.  

•  BSEE witnessed good applications of safe zones and training. However, multiple 

locations operating on the OCS lacked Safe/Drop zones on the rig floor and the 
associated training.  

• 

Improvements are needed in fall protection equipment inspections, familiarity with 
fall rescue plans, and storage and labeling of equipment inventory.   

•  BSEE identified effective implementation of Hazard Communication programs 
during the PBRI which covered available hazardous chemical lists, Safety Data 
Sheets throughout the rigs, containers being properly labeled and employees 
being trained. 

•  Operators and rig contractors regularly inspected third party equipment to ensure 

the equipment was properly grounded; however, some inspections are not 
consistently documented or referenced to a global standard.  

•  The inspection of man riding equipment by BSEE during the PBRI indicated there 

were potential gaps regarding the requirement of a designated spotter to ensure that 
the crane/winch/tugger operator has a visual line-of-sight during the entire personnel 
lift process on the rig floor.  

•  Most operators and rig contractors had sufficient integrity programs implemented for 

their critical equipment to ensure that equipment is fit for service, but some had 
gaps. 

 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and, when appropriate, contractors: 
 

•  Review established procedures for both internal and external communication of 

safety and environmental information. Consideration should be given to ensure the 
evaluation of potential hazards in the workplace and communicating information to 
employees and other affected parties prior to the start of well operations programs. 

•  Review periodic drill schedule to ensure the inclusion of spill drills and procedures to 

allow for an analysis and critique of each drill. 

•  Review SSE procedures, which define the process for managing SSEs fulfilling rig 
crew positions that are (1) new to the rig contractor company, (2) new to the person 
filling the position, or (3) new to the rig. Operators should ensure all SSEs have 
completed required training for the position, consider the percentage of SSEs who 
make up a crew, and consider identifying SSEs as such on the personnel on board 
list and by issuing them colored hard hats that identify them as SSEs. 

•  Review requirements to oversee and minimize risk to offshore employees by 

developing and implementing procedures for examining and assessing the fitness, 
which includes fatigue, of their offshore crews. Additionally, operators should assign 
a representative(s) who is responsible for establishing, implementing and 
maintaining the fitness for duty procedures. 

•  Ensure all restricted access and safe zones are sufficiently identified and 

communicated to personnel, and enforced by crewmembers and supervisors. 

•  Review fall protection programs and rescue plans, and ensure procedures exist for 

verifying that fall prevention equipment is provided, personnel are trained, and 
storage and inspections of equipment are conducted properly. 

•  Review each 3rd party equipment inspection checklist and ensure it includes 
grounding. See references API RP 14F, Paragraph 6.10.3 and API RP 14FZ, 
Paragraph 6.10.3 and documentation requirements.  

•  Review man riding procedures and consider including requirements for an effective 

line of sight communication (or alternative) with a dedicated observer. 

•  Review mechanical integrity systems to verify all work orders, preventative 

maintenance tasks, and corrective maintenance tasks are being properly prioritized 
and effectively addressed. 

-- BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

 
 
 

 

 

