SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

Safety Alert No. 358 
July 9, 2019 

 

 
 

 
 

 
       

                     Contact: Jason Mathews 
            
Phone:    (504) 731-1496 

Dislodged Boom Pawl Pin Unnoticed by  
Crane Operator during Pre-use Inspection 

 

 
 

 

          Location of the dislodged boom pawl pin is indicated by yellow circles. 
                                 

       

 

  

 

On March 20, 2019, BSEE inspectors observed an offshore crane pre-use inspection. 
During the inspection, the crane operator did not exhibit sufficient competency to ensure 
safe functionality of a boom pawl pin and its associated safety pin keeper. 
 
Earlier on that same day, the crew met about upcoming crane operations and reviewed a 
pre-filled Job Safety Analysis (JSA) that had not been altered to reflect the details of the 
current job.  BSEE inspectors noted that some of the crew members appeared inattentive 
during the JSA discussion.  Later, when BSEE inspectors asked the crew about the first 
step in the JSA, no one could tell the inspectors what it was.  
 
After the meeting, BSEE inspectors observed the crane operator’s pre-use inspection of 
the crane.  Though the functionality of the boom pawl pin was on the inspection checklist, 
the crane operator failed to observe that the corroded pin was dislodged and that the safety 
pin keeper was in a pan nearby.  Once the keeper had been removed, the pin likely shifted 

out as the boom pawl moved back and forth during normal operations.  The rust on the pin 
indicated  that  it  had  been  out  for  an  extended  amount  of  time  and  was  exposed  to  the 
elements.    When  the  BSEE  inspectors  saw  that  the  crane  operator  attempted  to  move 
forward with the checklist, they stopped work.  They asked the crane operator what the pin 
was and what it did, but he could not answer; yet, he checked the item off as having been 
inspected on the checklist.  
 
The boom pawl pin and keeper were reinstalled while BSEE inspectors were still on 
location, and the operator later installed a newly designed pin with a shoulder and cotter 
pin. 
 
On February 20, 2018, BSEE issued Safety Alert No. 329, which addressed a potentially 
catastrophic crane incident that occurred in November 2017. The incident described in 
Safety Alert No. 329 involved a boom pawl pin that dislodged and thereby allowed the 
crane boom to fall freely, hitting the side of a jackup rig and puncturing a hole in a diesel 
tank. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Distribute this Safety Alert and redistribute BSEE Safety Alert No. 329; 

• 

Inspect and reassess the functionality and design of all boom pawl pins and safety 
pin keepers; 

•  Ensure that all “bolts, pins, keepers, or cotter pins” are on the crane pre-use 

inspection checklist per API RP 2D; 

•  Review policies for verifying crane operator competency, which include knowledge 

of critical crane components;  

•  Review the JSA process (including, but not limited to: applicability, communication, 

and crew participation);  

•  Have HSE/compliance field personnel randomly accompany crane operators during 
pre-use inspections and have the crane operator describe what they are looking for 
as they check off the pre-use inspection form; and 

•  Consider developing an informational card depicting critical items, and their 

locations, that need to be checked during required inspections. 

-- BSEE-- 

 
 

 
 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

