SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

 

 
 

Safety Alert No. 356 
13 June 2019 

 

 
 

 
 

 
       

                     Contact: Jason Mathews 
        

Phone: (504) 731-1496 

 

Pipeline Pigs Inadvertently Ejected in Vicinity of Personnel  

  (above) Pigs located in Pig Loading Area 
 
 
 
 
(left) Damaged/Bent Platform Structural Member   

 

 

  

 
On 31 January 2019, two employees were tasked with initiating pigging operations on a 
U.S. Department of Transportation platform natural gas pipeline in the Gulf of Mexico 
(GOM). Lock-Out Tag-Out (LOTO) procedures were followed for isolating and bleeding 
the pig launcher from possible pressure sources.  Due to unanticipated issues with 
bleeding down the pressure in the launcher, a decision was made to re-pressurize and 
perform a second LOTO and bleed of the launcher.   

After apparently bleeding down the launcher to zero pressure, the launcher door was 
opened in order to begin loading pigs. One employee looked inside the launcher to 
confirm that there was at least one spherical pig in the launcher. (Note: records indicate 
that there were two pigs in the launcher prior to opening the launcher door, and a third 
was subsequently loaded.) As one employee was preparing to place another pig onto the 
pig raising mechanism, and the other employee was nearby, three pigs were ejected from 
the launcher. The force was strong enough that a platform structural support member was 
damaged (see photograph above). The employees pulled the facility Emergency 

Shutdown (ESD) and notified management of the occurrence. After the ESD, technicians 
isolated the pigging system from the blowdown line. 

In addition to the damaged structural support member of the platform, the pigs also 
damaged an atmospheric storage tank and hand railings. The pigs were lost into the 
GOM as unrecoverable marine debris. The incident was originally reported as marine 
debris. The most likely causal factor was determined to be pressure inside the 36-inch 
launcher isolation valve body that was released into the pig launcher. Another possible 
cause was that a pig expanded to seal off the launcher from exiting pressure in and 
upstream of the isolation valve. 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Verify that events categorized within this incident-type − serious near miss involving 
personnel safety − are not only reported as marine debris, but are also submitted to 
BSEE as a written report within 15 days of the incident date.   
 

•  Review and update (as necessary) hazard analyses for pigging operations, including 
hazards associated with (but not limited to) valve seating issues and pig deformation 
possibilities. 

•  Review and update operating procedures for pigging operations to ensure that the 

hazards identified from the above analyses are taken into consideration. 

•  Confirm the integrity of isolation valves by initiating more frequenct inspections of 
applicable components. Verify that these valves are being addressed within your 
maintenance procedures. 

•  Conduct additional hazard identification training and process isolation training for 

personnel whose tasks involve pig loading and launching.  
 

 

-- BSEE--  

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

