 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 333 
11 May 2018  

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

         Contact: Jason Mathews  
             Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Floating Production Platform Evacuated Amid Power Outage 

During September, 2017, a floating production facility in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico was 
operating on a single uninterruptible power supply (UPS) due to an “on line” UPS 
replacement project when the inverter on the functioning UPS failed. This failure cut 
automatic battery back-up to emergency power users, including the vessel management 
system (VMS) and operational critical telecoms.  
 
During their initial investigation of the failure, members of the crew detected a potentially 
hazardous hydrogen release in the UPS battery room. They believed the hydrogen was 
discharged from the UPS batteries. This led to the offshore installation manager (OIM) 
mustering all personnel. Additionally, the ventilation in the battery room was not working 
properly, which prevented exchange of air volumes and contributed to the continuing 
perception of a fire and explosion risk. Closed dampeners, plugged filters, and failure of 
motor controllers contributed to the ventilation deficiencies. 
  
While battery room issues were being addressed, the emergency generator was started 
so that power would be maintained if the main power was lost. In the process of syncing 
the emergency generator with main power, the UPS's static bypass switch opened due to 
the emergency generator’s frequency falling slightly out of range with normal power. 
When the static bypass switch opened, all loads on the emergency bus lost power 
(including the VMS and critical operational telecoms.) As a result of these loads being 
dropped, an abandon platform sequence was initiated, which shut down all main power 
and made safe the process.  
 
At the point the abandon platform sequence was initiated, the platform was experiencing 
a full electrical blackout. A well that was being worked on had already been secured with 
two tested barriers.  Several attempts to re-establish power were unsuccessful due to the 
logic sequence in the VMS which continued to send shutdown trip signals to the 
emergency generator circuit breaker whenever the control system rebooted. This logic 
sequence was hidden from the workers because the VMS ordinarily rebooted from battery 
power, which was unavailable. The backup script in the application did not inhibit the 
abandon platform shutdown signal during reboot. The solution that resulted in power 
restoration was to physically inhibit (disconnect wires) to the emergency generator 
breaker.  
 
During the event, the 264 nonessential personnel safely evacuated. After the detection of 
smoke in the UPS room, the OIM decided to have the core crew of 34 personnel also 
abandon the facility. 
 

 
 

BSEE is aware of other floating production facilities that experienced power issues in 
2017: 
 

  14-15 November 2017:  A floating platform had a series of trips in its power system 
over a two-day period. During the first day the gas train went offline due to a failed 
transmitter and a scrubber high level; then one turbine generator shutdown from 
diesel issues. On the second day, failures relatively unrelated to the first day 
resulted in three separate power outages.  
 

  27 January 2017: A shut-in floating platform was performing required regulatory 

testing.  Following a false fire alarm, the facility underwent a full power outage and 
was unable to restore power.  A full evacuation of all 56 essential and nonessential 
personnel was conducted via helicopters.   
 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following options:  

 

  Review the black start procedure for facilities to include, as a minimum 

consideration, the complete loss of power to the VMS. 
 

  Consult with the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) to evaluate and make 
appropriate recommendations for UPS protective features and their impact on 
availability of sub-distribution systems. 

 

 

 

  Review the performance of critical ventilation systems relative to their basis of 

design and develop a strategy to address maintenance requirements. 

  Review the project engineering handover process for critical electrical systems to 

ensure personnel are properly trained to operate new equipment. Particularly, 
electrical technicians should be knowledgeable of what is necessary to power up 
emergency loads after failures. 

  Create or review a platform evacuation procedure specifically prompted by a facility 

blackout. This evacuation procedure is unique because it is: 

o  more urgent than an evacuation due to, for example, a hurricane.  
o 

the procedure should consider a possibility of limited communications and 
reduced availability of resources due to the blackout. 
 

  Verify that all necessary Safety and Environmental Management System (SEMS) 

documentation (Emergency Response Plans, As-Built Electrical Drawings, Piping & 
Instrumentation Diagrams, Operating Procedures, etc.) are up-to-date and 
accessible in hardcopy format. 

 

If you have further questions not addressed in the recommendations above, contact 
BSEE at the number listed on this Safety Alert. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

