 
 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert 334  
11 May 2018  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

               Contact: Jason Mathews  
 
         Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Benzene Level Exceeds Exposure Limits 

 

During the conduct of two recent offshore production platforms inspections, BSEE 
inspectors and offshore personnel have been exposed to potentially hazardous levels of 
benzene. Benzene is a normal, naturally occurring component of petroleum.  
 
  During one inspection, the BSEE inspector noticed continuous venting of gas from a 

flotation unit.  Benzene warning signs were in place.  The operator was cited for failing 
to monitor emissions (and thus benzene levels) to adequately determine if the area 
was safe for operations personnel.    

  During a separate inspection, benzene warning signs were present but the operator 

could not provide data regarding the benzene concentration present in the production 
fluids. Subsequent testing showed elevated levels of benzene.  The operator failed to 
properly notify and educate personnel on safe work practices regarding benzene.  
Safe Work practices failed to address the necessary mitigation and administrative 
actions needed when monitoring individuals that may have higher benzene exposure.   

 
Due to the low level of understanding the hazards and mitigations associated with 
benzene, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following options:  
 

  Review this Safety Alert with all personnel to make them aware of the hazards 

associated with benzene and other similar volatile organic compounds. 

  Operators should create a Safe Work Practice or enhance an existing practice to 

cover benzene control technology, personal protective equipment, exposure limits, 
and monitoring and maintenance of personnel who have had excessive exposure. 

  Special consideration should be emphasized when operators are handling 

production fluids during operations including draining fluids from vessels, analyzing 
shake out samples, performing Surface Safety Valve (SSV) and Flow Safety Valve 

 
 

(FSV) testing and performing maintenance such as replacing glycol socks and 
charcoal filters.  

  Limit time spent working near atmospheric vent hatches on atmospheric vessels, 

unless the benzene hazards are known and properly mitigated through worker 
education and respiratory protective equipment. 

  All atmospheric vents and venting due to testing of safety valves should take into 

consideration the personnel breathing zone.  Proper venting location as well as 
proper respirators should be considered for personnel protection. 

  Create a schedule of testing and monitoring for benzene and other volatile organic 

compounds and share results with affected personnel. 

 
Relevant benzene exposure tables:  
 
OSHA 1910.1000 Table Z-2 
Substance 

8 Hour Time 
Weighted 
Average  
(TWA) 

Acceptable 
Ceiling 
Concentration  

Acceptable 
maximum peak 
above ceiling 
for 8Hr Shift 

Maximum 
duration for 
maximum peak 

Benzene 

10 ppm 

25 ppm 

50 ppm 

10 minutes 

 
 
Acute Benzene Exposure Consequences 
Noticeable irritation of eyes, nasal passages and throat 
Redness, dryness, cracking  and peeling of skin depending on exposure 
concentration 
Effects similar to those of other solvents including but not limited to dizziness, skin 
irritation, eye irritation  
 
 
Chronic Benzene Exposure Consequences 
Leucopenia 
Thrombocytopenia  
Anemia 
Pancytopenia 

Reduced white blood cell count 
Reduced platelet count 
Reduced red blood cell count 
Reduced white and red blood cell count 
with decreased hemoglobin 
 
Bone marrow ceases to function 
Reduced production of white blood cells, 
red bloods cells and platelets--- CANCER 

Decreased bone marrow function 
Aplastic Anemia 
Acute Myeloid Leukemia 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

