SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

Safety Alert No. 363 
August 1, 2019 

 

 
 

 
       

                       
            
 

Contact: Jason Mathews 
Phone:    (504) 731-1496 

 

 
 

Injury Occurs when Non-evacuated Personnel  

Enter Weather-restricted Area 

Position of the injured person at the time of the incident.                               

 

 

During Tropical Storm Barry, with sustained winds of 50 knots and gusts of 60 knots 
along with significant wave height of 15 to 20 feet at the incident location, all personnel 
onboard a Gulf of Mexico drilling rig were instructed to remain inside the 
accommodations, which includes hallways and interior structures.  
 
A decision was made by two personnel to exit the pump room using the entrance to the 
main deck. The two individuals (injured person and a roughneck) proceeded to exit the 
accommodations despite the fact that the main deck was a weather restricted area and 
identified as such during the pre-tour meeting. After exiting the accommodations, the 
injured person (IP) then entered onto the starboard aft extended platform. Once on the 
platform (outside of the hull), the IP made a video recording of the sea state on his mobile 
phone. The IP exited this platform back onto the main deck. The pair continued walking 
on the main deck towards the forward area. The IP then stopped and stepped through the 
doorway to the starboard forward extended platform.  

 
The roughneck stated that his back was turned toward the doorway and he was then 
soaked by water from behind. The roughneck turned around after being soaked and saw 
that the IP was unconscious on the starboard forward extended platform. The roughneck 
dragged the IP off the extended platform and through the doorway onto the main deck. At 
this point, the IP regained consciousness and was assisted by a witness. The witness 
helped the IP return to the accommodations.  
 
Once in the accommodations, a medic and the Offshore Installation Manager (Captain) 
were notified. Upon evaluation, the IP had severe pain to his left shoulder, upper back 
and a laceration to top of his head. The IP was unable to disembark the rig via medivac 
due to inclement weather. The total time the patient was onboard after injury was 59 
hours. 
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Prioritize the safety of offshore personnel and evacuate all personnel from exposure 

to tropical systems and associated risks in advance of approaching storms; 

•  Review your hurricane/storm monitoring, emergency response and evacuation plan 

to ensure they are designed to reduce risks to hazardous conditions; 

•  Ensure non-evacuated personnel remain inside and out of the environment 

associated with the storm so they are protected from wind and waves;  

•  Review emergency response and rescue plans at the pre-tour meeting and re-

emphasize the adverse weather conditions to ensure that personnel understand the 
complications that storms cause;  
 

•  Ensure that personnel are aware that hazards from unlikely sources, such as closing 

doors or moving equipment/furniture, could be present during extreme weather 
events such as tropical storms; and, 

•  Ensure personnel understand that if they need medical attention, it could be well 

over 24 hours before they can get a medical flight back to shore. 

 

 

--BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

