 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, 
Regulation and Enforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 
 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact:  Russell Hoshman 
(504) 736-2627 

BOEMRE 

Safety Alert No. 296 
12 May 2011 
 

Catastrophic Failures in Mooring Systems 

Possibly Put Floating Structures at Risk 


 

 
In early 2011, a single point mooring system for a deepwater Gulf of Mexico (GOM) project failed at the 
tether chain for a free-standing hybrid riser, allowing the buoyancy air can and the free-standing flowline 
riser to separate. The 440-ton buoyancy air can rose suddenly to the surface while the free standing riser 
collapsed. Based on the investigation of this event and a review of historical events, BOEMRE is revising 
and re-issuing Safety Alert #259. 
 

 

 
Failed Chain Link 

 

 
The investigation determined that a 6 ¾-inch diameter, 862-pound chain link in the tether chain had 
fractured and separated near its butt weld.  Analysis of the fracture indicated that the chain link had a 
weld repair and the fracture initiated in the middle of the weld.  Three links of the 24-link tether chain 
were found to have weld repairs.  After the chain had been heat treated, the non-US based manufacturer 
had made weld repairs to the chain by grinding defects and filling the void with weld material.  The chain 
was being built in accordance with Det Norske Veritas (DNV) Offshore Mooring Chain standard.  Post 
heat treat weld repairs are disallowed per DNV’s Offshore Mooring Chain standard.  The post heat treat 
weld repairs made the chain susceptible to hydrogen induced stress cracking due to the extreme hardness 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

of the weld material and the residual stress within the weld.  

   
As indicated in Safety Alert #259, issued January 16, 2008, catastrophic failure occurred in a portion of 

an anchoring system in two other separate incidents.  One component failed on 
a system in the GOM.  The other was found during installation to be defective 
after a similar component failed overseas.  
 
Incident No. 1: A one-ton, 8+ inch-diameter shackle connecting a mooring 
system to anchoring pilings failed on an overseas floating production facility. 
Subsequently, an identical shackle scheduled to be used in a deepwater GOM 
production facility also failed catastrophically under test loads below 
specifications.  Operator reviews of the manufacturing and testing procedure 
and additional material testing indicated that all of the shackles were possibly 
 
defective. 
 
Because anchor pilings with shackles attached had already been driven, the 
GOM test failure required new shackles to be manufactured, new pilings 
installed and the replacement of portions of the mooring systems that could not 
 
be recovered. Production start-up of the facility has been delayed by at least 
one year. 
 
Incident No. 2: Two sockets in a mooring system for a MODU failed under 
moderate loading. Testing of the remaining sockets found that others were also 
defective and a number of them failed catastrophically at less than 
specification loading. 
 
The BOEMRE and the USCG 8th District concluded the following:  
 
 
	 

In both cases the manufacturing procedures are thought to have been 
defective. Heat treating after casting apparently resulted in a metal 
unable to meet “Charpy” standards for material “toughness.”  
In both cases, the Operator’s and/or manufacturer’s specifications for 
the items were either out of date or inadequate. 
In both cases the Operator’s material testing requirements were either 
not followed, or were not adequate to insure specifications were met. 
 
 
	  Material handling during installation may have exposed the equipment 
     to potential critical damage. 
 
 
 
The BOEMRE recommends the following:  
 
 
	  Operators should review their specifications requirements to insure testing and manufacturing 

 
	 

 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

produces a product that will meet the usage demands. 

 
	  Operators should include sufficient Charpy testing requirements in the specifications to insure the 

 

 

 

materials and manufacturing process will produce a product of sufficient toughness.  

 
	  Operators should review their requirements for both destructive and non-destructive testing of 
 

 

 

critical elements.  Operators should insure their test coupons are properly representative.  

 

 

 
	  Operators should review their requirements for equipment inspection and handling to insure no 
 

 

damaging techniques are employed in transportation or installation.  

 
Subsequent to the 2011 incident, the following recommendations are added: 

Failed Mooring Socket 

 
	  Operators should monitor and inspect critical mooring components 100% of the time during the 

 

manufacturing process.  

 
	  Operators should ensure that the personnel and companies contracted to perform inspections and 

 

quality assurance of critical mooring components are qualified to do so.  

 

 

 
	  Operators should treat the area above a buoyancy air can for a free-standing hybrid riser as 

 

 

potentially hazardous. No floating production facility or support vessel should be allowed to pass over 
a free-standing hybrid riser. 

--BOEMRE--GOMR--
www.gomr.boemre.gov 
 

 

 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BOEMRE to inform the offshore oil and 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an 
incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

