 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and Environmental  
Enforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 
 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
(504) 736-2560 

BSEE 

Safety Alert Number: 298 
30 December 2011 
 

Electric Line Failure from Corrosion Results in Injury 

 
During well temporary abandonment operations, electric line (eline) was used to set a 1,000 pound cast 
iron bridge plug assembly (the assembly).  When the assembly was approximately 6 inches from the deck, 
the eline parted near the rope socket.  As the assembly fell, the Injured Person (IP), who was guiding the 
assembly to the well bore, was struck on the foot as a result of the IP being within the assembly’s 
 
potential fall radius.     
 
A BSEE investigation revealed the following: 
 

 After the incident, the eline operator cut 1,500 feet of the eline off the drum and found the eline to 
 

be corroded and brittle with 5 out of the 18 wire rope strands broken. 

 The approved BSEE Permit to Modify stated the assembly would be run with the workstring, but 
 

the assembly was actually run with eline. 

 The Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was performed 9 hours prior to the job and did not identify all 
 

 



risks associated with the specific lifting operation; e.g., the job required a worker to be within the 
assembly’s 9 feet potential fall radius but risk assessment of the assembly’s potential fall hazard, 
and the eline’s condition/capability for making the lift were not addressed. 
Findings from a third party lab’s visual examination of the eline indicated corrosion and pitting, 
with the fractured outer wire strands distorted and bent in a way indicative of shear/overload 
fracturing due to corrosion.  A scanning microscope examination also revealed the fractured 
surfaces were battered, abraded and corroded, also revealing shear/overload due to corrosion. 

    
 The eline operator couldn’t provide any standard operating procedures or long term preventative 
 

 

 

maintenance records for the eline unit. 

 
Therefore, the BSEE recommends:   
 

 Eline/wireline operators develop and maintain standard operating procedures and records for the 
 

eline/wireline units to include preventative maintenance protocol, visual inspection of the wire 
rope associated with these units and wire rope change-out records (similar to crane wire rope 
protocols).  Lessees should request a copy of these eline/wireline procedures and records. 

 Lessees and its contractors review Safety Alert No. 282 that discusses the need for workers to 
 

understand it is not the JSA Form alone that will keep them safe on the job but rather the process 
the JSA represents.  It is of little value to identify hazards and devise proper controls if the 
controls are not put in place. 

 

 

 

--BSEE--GOMR--
www.gomr.bsee.gov 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas 
industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss.  It 
 
also contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of 
such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

