SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 326 
6 December 2017  

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

              Contact: Jason Mathews 
 
        Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Floorhand Pinned In A Hazardous Location on Drilling Rig 

 
Recently, a fatality occurred onboard a drillship operating in the Gulf of Mexico. The deceased 
was a floorhand involved in pipe handling operations. At the time of the incident, the deceased 
was working on the rig floor and positioned between a stanchion, on the port side of the rig floor 
with his back to the retracting skate, when it moved causing the “loading platform” of the skate to 
pin him against the stanchion. It was reported that there is approximately a 3-inch clearance 
between the stanchion and the loading platform. The incident took place within a rig floor red zone 
– an area where entry is controlled. 
 

Stanchion 

Green Zone 

Layout of the rig floor and preliminary location of the employee - Green tape to left of the stanchion marks the green zone (safe area) 
 
The exact cause(s) of the fatality are now under investigation. Because the factors involved in this 
incident are common to many drilling rigs in the Gulf, BSEE recommends all operators and drilling 
contractors review their facilities’ hazardous areas and associated safe work practices.   
 
BSEE also recommends that operators consider the following:  
 

•  Review this Safety Alert with your crew and discuss safe practices within designated 

hazardous areas and encourage feedback to keep offshore personnel out of potentially 
hazardous areas. 
 

•  Review and verify all potentially hazardous areas are clearly marked and employees are 

trained on accessing those zones throughout their normal operations. 
 

•  Review equipment layout and operational design to reduce the interaction and application of 

scientific knowledge about people, facilities and management systems to reduce the 
likelihood and/or consequences of human error.  

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

