 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
BSEE 

 

U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and 
 
 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert No. 308 
 
19 March 2014 
 

 

 
Safety 
 
Alert 

Contact: Matt Nagy 
 
 
(504) 736-2828 

 

Overloading Leads to Catastrophic Failure of Crane Boom 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

   
 

A lease operator was performing a well permanent abandonment (PA) on an Outer Continental 
Shelf (OCS) platform. Operations were being conducted to pull the 3.5" workstring and casing 
knives from the well after using a power swivel to cut the 9 5/8” and 10 3/4” casings. The cutter 
assembly had become stuck while mechanically cutting the casings, and the hydraulic cylinders 
on the swivel stand were used to free the stuck knives. The cutter came free from the casing and 
 
the assembly was ready to be pulled from the well using the crane.  The workstring and knives 
weigh approx. 6,600 pounds. The load line on the platform crane was attached to the workstring 
using pipe elevators. The load chart in the crane indicated that the crane could perform a static 
 
lift of 21,448 pounds and dynamic lift of 16,780 pounds at a boom angle of 63 degrees. The 
boom was raised to a 63 degree angle and the crane operator then proceeded to pull on the 
 
workstring until 21,000 pounds was displayed on the weight indicator with no success. The crane 
 
operator stated "looked like workstring was stuck.”  After slacking off on the load, a second 
attempt was made to pull the workstring and knives from the well.  The crane operator stated that 
"the weight indicator in the crane cab was displaying 21,000 pounds during the second attempt.” 
 
The operator then stated that "all of the weight fell off of the indicator at which time the crane 
boom began to fall to the deck of the platform.” The crane boom, as well as a power pack, came 
 
to rest on the power swivel stand that had been used for the cutting operation. The tip section of 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
the boom came to rest at approximately 90 degrees to the right side of the main stem of the crane 
boom. No personnel were injured, and all were accounted for immediately following the 
 
incident. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

An investigation by BSEE concluded that the following factors contributed to the accident: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

•	 
 
•	  The crane operator used static load limits when pulling cutter assembly from the well 
 

Incorrect load chart was used at the time of the incident. 
 
 
 

instead of using the dynamic load limits as required by the contractor’s SOP. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  The bore holes of the pin connections in the boom showed excess wear thus causing slack 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in the connections and improper load distribution in the boom. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  The diagonal lacing, boom cords, and pin connections of the middle boom sections were 
 

 

 

 

 

found to be corroded. 
 

 

BSEE recommends the following prior to use of cranes on OCS platforms: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Conduct  proper  crane  pre-use  inspections  as  per  API  RP  2D,  C.4.1.2a  which  should 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

include proper load chart verification. 
 

 

 

•	  Conduct proper crane maintenance inspections as per API RP 2D, C.4.1.2 which should 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

include thorough inspection of boom connections and proper load chart verification. 
 

 

 

 

 

•	  Adherence  to  the  SOPs  and  procedures  put  forth  by  both  the  operator  and  contractor 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Use the load chart for the dynamic load limits when pulling tubulars from wells instead 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
while conducting lifting operations. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
of using the static load limits. 

 

 

 

 
 

•	  The Crane Operator shall verify that the hook load is within the crane’s applicable static 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
or dynamic rated load at the radius for which the load is to be lifted. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Crane boom  pull  shall never  exceed  the calculated weight  of the hook load, block,  and 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
rigging. 

—BSEE— 
 

 
www.bsee.gov 

 

 

 

 

 

   

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and 
 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an 
 
incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

