 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and   
Environmental Enforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
(504) 736-2560 

BSEE 

Safety Alert No. 300 
09 March 2012 
 

Unplanned Emergency Disconnect Sequence (EDS) of the Lower Marine Riser Package  

 
While the rig employees were troubleshooting a network issue on the Driller’s Blowout Preventer (BOP) 
control panel of an ultra-deepwater semisubmersible drilling rig, an unplanned EDS occurred.  The EDS 
of the deepwater well resulted in: 1) closing of the casing shear rams on electric line being used for 
logging and 2) closing of the blind shear rams  and a disconnect of the Lower Marine Riser Package 
(LMRP) from the BOPs.  The wellbore was cased with no perforations and had been successfully positive 
and negative pressure tested.  Subsequent to shear ram  activation, a non-radioactive logging tool was 
dropped into the well, with approximately 849 bbl of  9.0 ppg calcium chloride completion fluid released 
into the Gulf waters from the riser and boost line valves that failed in the open position.  The LMRP was 
re-latched to the BOP stack, a storm packer was installed and another negative test was successfully 
performed before the BOP stack was pulled back to the surface for diagnostics and repairs.  No sheen was 
observed due to the loss of the completion fluid, and the electric line and tool will be recovered when the 
well is re-entered. 
 
A BSEE investigation revealed the following: 
 

In the six (6) hours leading up to the unplanned event, there was an intermittent loss of 
communication between the Driller’s BOP control panel Nodes 7 and 8 via both Network’s 1 and 
2 with the Central Computer (CCU).  The visual red alarm/alerts in the background touch screen 
interface were very short in time spans; however, the visual alarms  would display after the 
Driller’s BOP control panel was off network for a continual duration of 30 seconds.  In all cases, 
network errors and communication losses were intermittently cycling with an increasing 
frequency and did not result in the EDS occurrence.   

  One unsuccessful attempt was made to recycle power to both Nodes 7 and 8 of the Driller’s 

control panel in an effort to eliminate the communication losses.  Subsequent to recycling, the 
Driller’s BOP control panel was opened and entered by the drilling contractor’s Senior Subsea  
Engineer, Chief and rig Electricians in order to determine the cause of the loss of 
communications.  It was during this period when the EDS incident occurred from the Driller’s 
panel. 
A Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was not performed prior to entering the Driller’s panel, and the 
Offshore Installation Manager (OIM) was not aware of the troubleshooting operation inside the 
Driller’s BOP control panel; he was only made aware that the power would be recycled.   

 

  A GE/Hydril Bulletin EB11-011 dated 8 December 2011 indicates that the PCI Digital I/O 

1930248-01 should have been replaced with board 3149494 to eliminate the nodes and networks 
from  working offline; however, as outlined above, the nodes and networks did not directly  
contribute to the EDS.  These boards should be changed out in the following panels: Processor 
Array Cabinet (Blue and Yellow), HPU Interface Panel, HPTU Interface Panel, Diverter Interface 

 



 

Panel and the Driller’s Panel with I/O boards; the Driller’s panel is where the disconnect took 
place.  

  A GE/Hydril Engineering Bulletin EB11-004 dated 3 August 2011 addresses that an accidental 

EDS activation can occur if the ribbon cable (P/N 1930050-01) was to become disconnected 
while the system is powered up or in the operating mode.   

  On 13 December 2011 the drilling contractor received a copy of GE/Hydril Bulletin EB11-011 

which cautioned that a voltage disruption to the digital board or disconnection of the ribbon cable 
and/or Molex connectors could result in  actuation of the EDS.  The Bulletin also states that if 
service is required to the panel, disconnection from the power source is required.  

  The EDS occurred by the rig Electricians not disconnecting the power source before performing 

troubleshooting operations, resulting in a reduced voltage drop across the Solid State Relay (SSR) 
board when the power source line was disrupted or the communication ribbon cable was moved.   

  Two Media Converter Switches located inside the Driller’s BOP control panel caused the 

network disruptions leading to the alarms/red flashing background on the panel screen.  The 
faulty switches and the Driller’s BOP control panel being offline did not cause the EDS.  

  Both Media Boards and faulty Media Converter Switches associated with Networks 1 and 2 were 

 

replaced during BOP stack retrieval, resulting in once again all Networks and Nodes working 
properly.  
It was determined from GE/Hydril that this is the third occurrence of this kind associated with  
this particular type of Solid State Relay board; the first occurrence was at a rig shipyard in 
October 2011, and the second in December 2011 while in the field overseas.    

 
The BSEE recommends to the Lessees, Operators and their contractors that: 
 

  All rigs adhere to the guidelines outlined in the GE/Hydril Engineering Bulletins EB11-011 and 

EB 11-004.  

  A formal written JSA must be completed and discussed prior to performing work in the Driller’s 

BOP control panel in order to provide an opportunity to perform the potential hazard analyses 
associated with the tasks; including present status of wellbore conditions and operations.  Only  
then can the risks associated with the tasks be reduced to As Low as Reasonably  Practicable 
(ALARP).   It is not the JSA Form  alone that enhances safety on the job, but rather the process  
the JSA represents.  

  Chain of command must be implemented at all times and the OIM consulted prior to 


troubleshooting critical BOP control equipment. 


  Troubleshooting of the Driller’s BOP control panel must be performed while the panel is 

disconnected from the power source or according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

  The rig installation of a ribbon cable bracket to prevent any disconnection of the I/O board and 

resulting EDS activation. 

 
 

 
  

 

www.bsee.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Safety-Alerts.aspx  

--BSEE--GOMR--

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas 
industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss.  It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such 
an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

