SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 328  
January 5, 2018    

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

             Contact: Jason Mathews  
              Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Gas Release Hazards Identified by BSEE 

BSEE inspectors use hand-held gas detectors, thermal cameras, and infrared thermometers during gas release risk inspections. 

 

 

The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently conducted a review on the 
latest  compliance and incident  data to  identify  safety  trends  throughout the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  The 
analysis pointed to a potential risk associated with gas releases. During the timeframe reviewed, 
thirty-one gas release incidents were reported to BSEE by fourteen unique operators. Further, the 
bureau issued thirty-six gas release incidents of non-compliance during the same timeframe. To 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  future  incidents  or  compliance  issues,  BSEE  developed  a  protocol  to 
conduct  targeted  Gas  Release  Performance-Based  Risk  Inspections  on  twenty-six  production 
platforms and ten well operations in the Gulf of Mexico Region over a two day period. 
 
At  the  completion  of  the  inspections,  BSEE  further  reviewed  the  results  supplied  by  the  district 
offices  and  conducted  additional  reviews  on  Safety  and  Environmental  Management  System 
specific  items  –  e.g.,  training  documents,  electrical  classification  drawings,  safe  work  practices, 
job safety analyses, etc. The findings were: 
 

  Seventeen percent of the facilities involved in the  inspections had documented oil or gas 

accumulation.  

  Eight of the thirty-six facilities, or 22 percent, had a non-operable gas detector, no process 
implemented for  calibrating  devices, failed  a bump test,  or  had  no  documentation  on the 
frequency and/or results of inspections.  

  The  facilities  associated  with  the  Gas  Release  inspections  had  no  issues  identified  by 
BSEE  staff  on  excessive  temperatures.  In  fact,  most  observations  made  by  inspectors 
indicated high temperature areas were well insulated and out of human reach.  

  Only  one  facility  had  an  outdated  electrical  classification  drawing,  but  very  few  facilities 
had  warning  signs  to  address  area  classification.    Most  signs  observed  by  BSEE 
inspectors during the Gas Release investigation focused on personal protective equipment 
– ear protection, safety glasses, gloves, etc. Additionally, one facility failed to notify BSEE 
of potential hazards through an orientation.  

  The inspections suggest that operators’ safe work practices do not fully cover pressurized 
welding  enclosures,  and  are  not  readily  available  to  offshore  personnel.  Bridging 
documents  with  contractors  need  to  be  evaluated  to  ensure  personnel  are  fulfilling  their 
obligations.  

  Overall,  job  safety  analyses  reviewed  by  BSEE  met  the  intent  of  Subpart  S;  however, 
multiple  job  safety  analyses  had  potential  noncompliance  with  30  CFR  250.1911  or 
250.1928.  

  BSEE  identified  multiple  facilities  which  lacked  evidence  of  personnel  training  in  gas 

detection.  

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators: 
 

 

  Develop and implement daily and weekly inspection protocol to check for common gas 

releases based on incident data – float cells, thief hatches, produced water treatment units, 
etc.  

  Work with gas detector original equipment manufacturers to develop and implement 

monthly, quarterly, and annual inspection protocol for the handheld gas detectors on their 
facilities that document the date of the inspection or test; include the name and position, and 
the signature of the person who performed the inspection or test; include the serial number 
or other identifier of the equipment on which the inspection or test was performed; include a 
description of the inspection or test performed. 

  Review their facilities and contracted drilling rigs to determine if area classification signs 

exist. If they don’t exist or they’re not properly marked, operators shall mark the area with 
signs identifying potential hazards.  

  Review all safe work practices associated with gas detection and verify that they are 

available to all employees involved in the operations and reflect current practices.  

  Verify their compliance with 30 CFR 250.1928 and evaluate / audit their latest JSAs with 30 

CFR 250.1911.  

  Meet with gas detector original equipment manufacturers, production contractors, and 

drilling contractors to develop minimal training requirements for day-to-day operations.   

  Verify that all responsible company personnel and contractors are trained in the work 

practices necessary to understand and perform their jobs in a safe and environmentally 
sound manner in accordance with all provisions of Subpart S. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

