  

 
 
 
May 20, 2014 
Washington, DC 

SAFETY ALERT 


Coast Guard Alert #08-14 
BSEE Alert #312 

 

DYNAMIC POSITIONING SYSTEM FAILURES ON VESSELS  


 
OTHER THAN MOBILE OFFSHORE DRILLING UNITS (VESSELS)
 

 
Discussion:  This Joint Safety Alert addresses a dynamic positioning (DP) incident on a vessel resulting in a 
loss of position while conducting a critical Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) activity.  An equipment failure, an 
operational error and multiple failure modes not identified in the vessel’s Failure Modes and Effects Analysis 
(FMEA) combined to produce the loss of position.  The OCS activity – well operations that introduced 
hydrocarbon flow from a well to the vessel – was critical because of the potential for loss of position to result 
in personal injury, environmental pollution, or catastrophic damage.  These consequences were averted 
because of the successful actions taken by the crew, who performed an emergency disconnect from the well 
in accordance with established procedures.  The Coast Guard and the BSEE are issuing this joint Safety Alert 
because we share jurisdiction over vessels that perform this type of OCS activity and wish to highlight the 
interaction between a vessel’s Safety Management System (SMS) and a leaseholder’s Safety and 
Environmental Management System (SEMS).  See our Memorandum of Agreement OCS-07 “Safety and 
Environmental Management Systems and Safety Management Systems”.  The incident report highlighted the 
following: 
 
Vessel SMS:  The vessel has a valid International Safety Management (ISM) certificate issued by its Flag 
State.  The Coast Guard reminds vessel owners and operators that compliance with the ISM Code, when 
required, is essential to safe operations, particularly when those operations are critical OCS activities.   
 

 

 

 

1)	  At  the  time  of  position  loss,  the  vessel  was  performing  overdue  maintenance  on  its  main  power 
distribution  bus  circuit  breakers.    The  circuit  breakers  were  two  years  overdue  for  their  routine 
inspection  and  maintenance  requirements.    Opportunity  existed  for  this  work  to  be  performed  in  a 
 
shipyard on an earlier occasion, but the vessel deferred and conducted maintenance during a critical 
OCS activity (See ISM Code Regulations 7, 10). 

 

2)	  In  support  of  the  circuit  breaker  maintenance,  the  vessel  was  transitioning  from  a  “closed  bus” 
operation to an “open bus” configuration with 50% of the vessel’s thrusters operating on each bus. 
After  opening  the  bus  tie,  the  initiating  event  --  mal-operation  of  a  generator  protection  circuit 
combined with a design flaw in a power transformer protection circuit to cause 50% of the vessel’s 
thrusters to stop.  The vessel’s engineer attempted to restore power to these thrusters by closing the 
bus  tie  without  synchronizing  two  live  busses  (crash  sync).    Design  features  and  operational 
procedures to prevent such an action and consequences were not sufficiently in place (See ISM Code 
Regulations 6, 8). 
 

   

 

 

3)	  The  vessel  had  a  design  deficiency  and  an  omission  in  the  FMEA  which  failed  to  detect  the 
deficiency.  The FMEA should have listed crash sync as a possible failure mode and discussed the 
system’s ability to ride through it.  The design deficiency allowed a power transient to cause a total 
loss of thrust (See ISM Code Regulation 10.3). 
 

 

 

 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT 


 

DYNAMIC POSITIONING SYSTEM FAILURES ON VESSELS  


OTHER THAN MOBILE OFFSHORE DRILLING UNITS (VESSELS)
 
 

 
Leaseholder/operator SEMS:  The BSEE strongly recommends leaseholders/operators consider Coast 
Guard recommendations for DP vessels when evaluating potential hazards and establishing and 
implementing contractor safe work practices in their SEMS program (see 30 CFR §§ 250.1911 and 
250.1914).  The BSEE reminds leaseholders/operators of their critical role in ensuring safety and 
environmental hazards associated with contracted vessels on their lease are properly managed.  In particular, 
leaseholders/operators must ensure hazards associated with a loss of position by contracted DP vessels are 
analyzed and managed with appropriate contractor safe work practices.  
 
Dynamic Positioning: 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends owners and operators of a vessel using DP to conduct this type of 
critical  OCS  activity  on  the  U.S.  OCS  follow  DP  guidance  provided  in  the  ‘‘DP  Operations  Guidance 
Prepared through the Dynamic Positioning Committee of the Marine Technology Society to aid in the safe 
and effective management of DP Operations Part 2 Appendix 2 (DP Project/ Construction Vessels)” (MTS 
 
DP Guidance).  See our notice published in the Federal Register (77 FR 62247) for more details. 
  
 

 

1)	  The vessel did not have a Critical Activity Mode of Operation (CAMO) defined.  Ensure a vessel has 
a  CAMO  defined  and  is  in  its  CAMO  during  critical  OCS  activities. 
  Refer  to  MTS 
 
“TECHOP_ODP_12_(O)  (Defining  Critical  Activities  Requiring  Selection  of  Critical  Activity 
 
Mode”,  January  2014  when  developing  a  CAMO  and  identifying  the  specific  OCS  activities  that 
require the vessel to be in its CAMO. (see MTS DP Guidance Paragraph 4.9) 
   
 

 

2)	  Ensure  the  DP  operations  manual  and  SMS  both  appropriately  address  DP  equipment  inspection, 
repair  and  maintenance  requirements.    A  vessel  should  not  perform  maintenance  that  may  cause  a 
loss of position during a critical OCS activity. (MTS DP Guidance Paragraphs 4.8, 4.9, 4.11) 
 
 

 

3)	  Refer  to  International  Marine  Contractors  Association  (IMCA)  M166  “Guidance  on  Failure  Modes 
and  Effects  Analysis  (FMEAs)”  and  MTS  Technical  and  Operational  Guidance  (TECHOP) 
 
“TECHOP_GEN_01_(Power  Plant  Common  Cause  Failures)”,  September  2012  when  developing  a 
vessel’s FMEA.  At a minimum a vessel’s FMEA and DP FMEA Proving Trials should address the 
common failure modes listed in paragraphs 4.2, 4.3 and Figure 1 of TECHOP_GEN_01. ( MTS DP 
Guidance Paragraphs 4.2 and 4.7) 
 
 

 

4)	  Ensure  a  structured  competence  assurance  program  is  applied  to  all  key  DP  personnel.    At  a 
minimum  DP  personnel  should  be  required  to  demonstrate  proficiency  in  understanding  the 
redundancy  concept  and  emergency  procedures  in  intervening  for  failed  redundancy.    Intervention 
proficiency in restoring power and thrust should be demonstrated during drills and annual trials. (See 
MTS DP Guidance Paragraph 4.14) 
 

 

 
For additional information, contact Lieutenant Chris Martin at 985-850-6495 with the Coast Guard Outer 
Continental Shelf Center of Expertise or Staci King at 703-787-1736 with the BSEE Office of Offshore 
Regulatory Programs SEMS Branch. 
 

 

 

# 


