 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJune 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSSponsored by CCPSSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Portuguese, and Spanishsh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Portuguese, and SpanishHere™s What HappenedHere™s What HappenedHow Did This Happen ?How Did This Happen ?What You Can DoWhat You Can DoPSID Members see: Free Search--AgitatorToo Many StartToo Many Start--Stop SwitchesStop SwitchesThe evening shift was assigned to clean an agitated mixing vessel. The supervisor asked the lead operator to complete the ﬁLock out.ﬂ The lead operator tagged and locked out the motor starter in the Motor Control Center, verified the motor would not start by pressing the Start button and put a lock and ﬁDangerŠDo Not Operateﬂ tag on the Start-Stop station near the vessel. The supervisor then issued the Confined Space Entry permit and two workers entered the vessel and cleaned it for the rest of the shift.The oncoming day shift needed to reissue the Confined Space Entry permit. When they tried the Start button on the Start-Stop station, the agitator started! The agitator motor was NOTlocked out! Easier than you might imagine. Did the Lock-out undo itself? No, but the wrong motor was locked out. How can that happen when the starter was labeled the same as the agitator? And, why didn™t the agitator start when the Start button was tested the first time?Here™s how. Several months before, the agitator motor was changed out to a larger size. The size increase required a larger motor starter and wiring. Because the plant might need the ﬁoldﬂ system again some day, it was not removed. Instead, a new Start-Stop station was installed near the vessel, in fact, right next to the old Start-Stop station. The ﬁoldﬂ Start-Stop station was on the flange part of a column next to the vessel and the ﬁnewﬂ Start-Stop station was in the web of that same column. When the technician locked out and tested the system, he was testing the ﬁoldﬂ system which was disconnected. The ﬁnewﬂ system was still active!Follow all safety procedures as written. Do not take short cuts or assign your duties to someone else.Keep abreast of changes in your unit. Know what has been changed and how that change might affect your job.Use your Management of Change procedures to ensure that all out-of-service equipment is labeled so that it cannot be confused with equipment being used.Consider disconnecting electrical leads whenever uncertainty exists.Check and re-check, especially where safety is concerned. Look around the area. Is anything unusual?Remember that your safety depends on others and your own personal actions. Don™t bet your life on someone else™s word. Verify safety checks yourself.When you do a safety check, make sure it is on the right equipment !