 How This Relates to Process Safety and How This Relates to Process Safety and What You Can Do to be Safe !What You Can Do to be Safe !This event may seem to have little relationship to process safety in chemical plants, but NUMEROUS building and vessel explosions have occurred under similar conditions!!!ŁStoring flammables of any kind in an enclosed area is risky business. Small leaks can lead to flammable mixtures in a portion of, or an entire building. Then, only an ignition source is neededŠand, ignition sources are veryeasy to find!ŁStore flammable liquids in containers and cabinets specially designed for such use. Be especially alert for solvents used in maintenance activities.ŁStore flammable gases in the open or well ventilated areas so that small leaks can dissipate and NOT accumulate. Particularly watch out for instrument calibration gases and welding bottles.ŁRemember that some gases are heavier than air and some are lighter. Provide the appropriate ventilation.ŁKnow and consider where and how explosive mixtures might accumulate in piping systems or process vessels, such as in the head space of atmospheric tanks. Be prepared to recognize when flammables are present and react quickly to prevent ignition.CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored by CCPSSupportersPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelFebruary 2004Here™s What Happened:How Did This Happen?ŁAcetylene is one of those gases that has a very wide flammability range. In fact, acetylene is flammable in concentrations from 2.5% to 82% in air.ŁIt took only a very small leak to eventually fill the cab of this truck with the ¼ pound of acetylene needed to reach a flammable mixture.ŁWhen the door was opened, the flammable mixture ﬁfoundﬂ an ignition source.ŁIn this case, the driver was seriously injured, but luckily, was not killed.CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSFlammable Gas in Enclosed Space = BOOM !Flammable Gas in Enclosed Space = BOOM !A pickup truck with a small cylinder of acetylene stored in the cab was parked for the weekend. Unfortunately, the cylinder had a VERY small leak. Because all the windows were closed, a flammable atmosphere was developed inside the truck™s cab. When the owner returned on Monday and opened the door---BOOM. You can see the results.Flammable materials in unventilated areas is an explosion waiting to happen!This edition is also available in German, French and Spanish. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.