 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelSeptember 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSDedicated to all those that lost their lives or loved ones in the 9-11-01 terrorist attacksThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and Spansh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and SpanishishSeptember -a month that brings memories of the tragic events of September 11, 2001. Four airplanes were hijacked by an organized group of terrorists. Two planes struck the World Trade Center Towers in New York CityŠcausing both to tragically crash to the ground. A third struck the Pentagon inThere have been a number of actions by governments, trade and professional associations and individual companies, including:the US federal government created the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) which continues to aggressively improve security systems across the countryState and local governments have reviewed their security systems and have made a variety of significant improvementsthe US Coast Guard and Department of Transportation have published federal regulations dealing with security issuesAIChE™s Center for Chemical Process Safety (CCPS) developed and distributed "Guidelines for Analyzing and Managing the Security Vulnerabilities at Fixed Chemical Sites" American Chemistry Council members have implemented the Security Code of Responsible CareRMany chemical facilities globally have completed a Security Vulnerability Analysis (SVA) and have implemented recommendationsAn informed, watchful workforce is a major element in any site's security effort.Question things that look out of place: packages, people and transportation vehicles should have been ﬁrequestedﬂ by someone at your site. If they are present for no apparent reason, there is immediatecause for concern. Get the right people involved in investigating these questionable activities and events.Your site may have a variety of security procedures dealing with suspicious packages, bomb threats, emergency response and others. Take time to read them and understand your role in carrying them out.Be particularly diligent if your site handles hazardous chemicals. These facilities are especially sensitive and should receive special attention.Housekeeping is an important element in site security. A clean plant is a plant where ﬁunusual itemsﬂ are readily detected.Recognize that increased security may result in increased inconveniences. Be tolerant of them.STAY ALERT! Our collective watchfulness creates the foundation for our future well being.September 11, 2001September 11, 2001----------Never to be Forgotten!Never to be Forgotten!of dollars in property damage amidst untold human suffering. The efforts of the emergency response organizations were truly heroic and played a major role in restoring order out of the chaos.Washington DC and a fourth crashed in a field in Pennsylvania. Thousands of lives were lost along with billionsWhat has happened since–What You can do–