www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

http://www.dekra-process-safety.com/

Process Safety Stories!

January 2019

This issue sponsored by

The power of story-telling has been recognized for centuries as an effective way to 
impact the brain and the heart, and to preserve history. Children throughout the world 
learn fairy tales from collections such as Mother Goose, Grimm’s Fairy Tales, Aesop’s 
Fables, and others. They remember these stories, and lessons from them, throughout their 
lives. 

Process safety pioneer Trevor Kletz (1922–2013) often wrote about the value of 

stories in process safety. People remember stories, and they remember them much more 
reliably than lectures on process hazards and other training materials. Fortunately the 
process industries have made significant progress in reducing the frequency of major 
incidents. In the past, people working in process facilities gained a healthy respect

for process hazards by personally experiencing what 
can happen when a process is not properly controlled. 
Without that experience, we rely on training, drills, and 
procedures on how to go about our daily work safely. 
When there is no good connection between “what to 
do” and “why we do it that way” we can become 
complacent. Why do we have to follow all of these 
process safety management procedures to prevent 
incidents that never happen? We forget that incidents 
do not happen so often because we are following the 
required procedures. Procedures become vulnerable to 
not being followed rigorously. Complacency and 
failure to follow procedures are some of the first steps 
on a path leading to a future incident.

Aesop’s Fable of the Raven 
and the Pitcher reminds us 
of the value of creativity.

The October 2017 Beacon 
is based on Aesop’s Fable 
of the Boy Who Cried Wolf.

What Can You Do?

 If you have many years of experience in the process industries, you remember stories of past incidents 

which you directly experienced, or which were told by your predecessors. Share these stories with your less 
experienced colleagues. Remind them that “it can happen here” because “it has happened” in the past.

 If you are relatively new to the process industries, ask your veteran colleagues to share their past 

experiences with process safety incidents.

 Suggest to management that they write down or otherwise document stories to preserve memories of past 

incidents before they are lost as people move to other jobs or retire.

 Look for stories about incidents which occur in any industry, and figure out what you can learn from them 

that relates to your job. Many Beacons are examples of how a seemingly unrelated incident can provide 
important lessons for our industry. Some examples include a fire on a passenger boat (Sept. 2016, 
management of change), an engine failure on an airplane (Oct. 2018, mechanical integrity and hazardous 
energy), and a fire in Atlanta airport (Dec. 2018, emergency response and common cause failures).

“Stories are where memories go when they are forgotten.”

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

- Doctor Who, Series 9, Episode 12  

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

