www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel
One Incident – Three Beacons!

(and there could have been more)

This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

November 2011

If you have been a regular reader of the Beacon for several 

years, you may recognize the pictures to the left. The top 
picture shows a large fire at an oil refinery near Sunray, Texas
on February 16, 2007. The second picture  shows some of the 
damage. Three workers were injured and the refinery was 
temporarily shut down. This incident was the subject of three 
Beacons, with three very different safety lessons:
(cid:131) October 2008:  “Ice ruptures unused pipe and causes fire”
(cid:131) May 2010:  “Fireproofing structural supports”
(cid:131) September 2011:  “Hazards from abandoned equipment”
There are more things to learn from this single incident. 

You can go to www.csb.gov and look for the Valero Refinery 
Propane Fire investigation to see the complete report.

The Beacon is 10 years old!

The Beacon is 10 years old this month! Since 
November 2001, the Beacon has shared 
process safety lessons with plant workers 
throughout the world in an ever increasing 
number of languages. The current direct 
mailing list contains over 21,000 email 
addresses. CCPS thanks its member 
organizations, the Beacon sponsors, the 
Beacon Committee, and over 40 volunteer 
translators for making it possible to share this 
information and improve safety in our industry.

October 2008

May 2010

September 2011

Did you know?

(cid:206) There is more than one thing to learn from every 
incident or near miss in your plant.
(cid:206) Nearly every incident has multiple root causes.
(cid:206) Incidents can have multiple contributing causes. 
Here are some examples of contributing causes:  
safety equipment or shutdown systems which didn’t 
work, failure of control systems and procedures to 
control a plant disturbance, failure of emergency 
response systems and procedures.
(cid:206) You can’t learn anything from an incident or near 
miss which is never reported!

What can you do?

(cid:206) Know how to recognize incidents and near misses, 
and how to report them so they can be investigated.
(cid:206) If you are involved in an incident investigation, 
insist that the investigation be complete. Identify all of 
the root and contributing causes so you can learn as 
much as possible. 
(cid:206) When you read an incident report, or the Beacon, 
look for all of the lessons learned and think about how 
they apply to your plant.
(cid:206) Look for more information about a Beacon
incident. We don’t have much space so we have to leave things out!!!

Look for ALL of the lessons from every incident!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

