This issue sponsored by

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Can overcooling a reactor cause a runaway reaction?
In 1996, there was an explosion of a 600 US gallon (~2.3 cu m) batch 
reactor in a British dye factory. The process required addition of nitrosyl
sulfuric acid (NSA) to the reactor, containing an amine and sulfuric acid, at a 
temperature between 30 and 40 °C. The reaction was exothermic – it 
generated heat. The feed typically took about 5 hours, and the feed was 
manually controlled. This process had been operating for many years, and 
hundreds of batches prepared without problem.

Jacksonville, Florida, 2007

www.iomosaic.com

July 2018

Damage from other runaway reactions

Early in the NSA feed, the batch was overheated to almost 50 °C and the 

NSA feed was stopped. The batch was then cooled to 25 °C (too cold) and 
NSA addition was resumed. When the NSA feed was completed the batch 
temperature could not be controlled with the available cooling, and exceeded 
the maximum temperature which could be recorded by the temperature 
instrument. The reactor was overpressurized by the runaway reaction and it 
exploded. The lower part of the reactor was propelled off of its supports onto 
the building floor. The reactor agitator landed on the roof, and the top of the 
reactor was found about 500 ft (150 m) away. Fortunately, nobody was 
injured. The direct cost was more than 2 million UK Pounds.
Reference:  Partington and Waldram, IChemE Symposium Series, No. 148, pp. 81-93, 2001.

Morganton, North Carolina, 2006

Did you know?

 The rate of most exothermic chemical reactions increases as the 
temperature increases, and decreases at lower temperature. If the 
reaction temperature is too low, the reaction will be slower, and 
unreacted material may accumulate in the reactor. If the reaction 
temperature then increases, the unreacted material will be 
available to react. If there is enough unreacted material, the 
energy released may exceed the reactor cooling capacity.
 At high temperature, other chemical reactions including 

decomposition reactions which are not important at the intended 
reaction temperature may become significant. These reactions 
may release more energy, and the reaction products might 
include gases which can generate high pressure in a reactor.

 In this incident, it is believed that approximately 30% unreacted 

NSA accumulated in the reactor during the time that the batch 
was too cold. Laboratory studies and computer simulations 
indicated that this accumulation might not have been sufficient 
to cause the runaway. Another heat source, such as a steam leak 
to the reactor jacket, might have been necessary. However, the 
energy available from unreacted NSA made the reactor more 
vulnerable to a runaway if there were other heat sources.
 It is important to ensure that reaction systems are in good 

working order, since equipment leaks and other malfunctions 
can cause, or contribute to, chemical reaction incidents.

What can you do?

 Know which of your reactions are exothermic, 

and may become uncontrollable if reactants 
accumulate. Some examples include 
polymerization, nitration, sulfonation, acid-base 
reaction, and oxidation.

 Be aware that, for many reactions, it is not only 
the upper temperature limit which is critical for 
safety, but also the lower temperature limit. 
Overcooling a reactor can result in 
accumulation of unreacted material which can 
cause an uncontrollably high temperature later.
 Understand the consequences of deviating from 

critical safety parameters – temperature, 
pressure, flow rate, mixing, or whatever is 
critical for your process. Be aware of the 
consequences of deviations, both too high and 
too low, and know what action to take if a 
deviation occurs.

 If you do not have chemical reaction processes 

in your plant, be aware that low temperature can 
still cause problems. For example, liquids may 
freeze or become very thick, or solids may 
precipitate out of a solution.

It might not be safe if your process is “too cool”!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

