 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored by CCPSSupportersPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelOctober 2003Here™s What Happened:A very simple jobŠfill the tank with water. This is a common occurrence at a manufacturing plant and has minimal hazards. In this case, site personnel were being extra cautious. They started the water flow and confirmed that air was coming out of the vent on top of the tank. Everything seemed to be fine–BUTBUT, the source of the water was the plant fire water system---and the flow was VERYVERYhigh! The vent did not have enough capacity to relieve all of the displaced air, pressure built up in the tank, and BOOMBOOMŠthe top blew off when the roof seam failed.Liquid transfer can lead to major vessel damage. ﬁTransfer rateﬂ must not exceed ﬁvent capacity.ﬂHow Did This Happen?Tank vents are usually sized to handle normal processing activities, such as pumping in to or out of the tank during product transfers. Venting and vacuum break capacities are determined using formulas, or engineering calculations. These calculations are often called the ﬁvent system design basis.ﬂProblems occur when the inflow or outflow of liquid is greater than the capacity of the vent system. For inflow, it leads to an increase of pressure inside the tank because the vapor can™t get out fast enough. It doesn™t take much pressure (in some cases just a few inches of water) to cause a lot of damage. Tanks usually have large surface areas, so when pounds per square inch is multiplied by a large number of square inches, the force can be huge! In this case, the roof seam was the weak point and failed first. Don™t pop your top–CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYTransferring Liquids: What You Transferring Liquids: What You Can Do to be Safe !Can Do to be Safe !Watch out for ﬁTemporaryﬂ operationsŠthis tank vent was probably sized fornormal processing conditions, not for fire water addition. If uncertain---CHECK! TestingŠSafeOutŠCleaning: there are many times that a vessel must be filled with water. Each time it is, make sure that the fill rate is slow enough for the vent system to handle the displaced vapor. And just to be sure, monitor the pressure in the vent space to make sure it is less than the vessel's pressure rating.When unsure, add water at ﬁnormalﬂ processing rates.AIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319PSID Members look in Free SearchŠTank OverpressureThis edition is also available in German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.SSThis top–Belongs here!This top–Belongs here!