www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Emergency Preparation – The Titanic Disaster

July 2012

This issue sponsored by

April 15, 2012 marked the 100th anniversary of the loss of the 

ocean liner Titanic in the North Atlantic Ocean, approximately 2½ 
hours after hitting an iceberg. Over 1,500 people died in the most 
famous maritime disaster in history. Thousands of pages have been 
written about the loss of the Titanic, as well as many documentary and 
fictional movies produced. Many focus on the construction of the ship 
and the actions of its captain and crew. Whatever the construction and 
operating issues, attention to one particular issue could have saved 
many lives – Emergency Preparation! 

Some specific failures in emergency preparedness before the 

sinking of the Titanic included:
• Not enough lifeboats for all passengers and crew, perhaps because 

the builders considered the ship “unsinkable”!

• No lifeboat drills had been conducted, and many people did not 

know where to go or what to do.

• Many of the first lifeboats to leave the Titanic were not  full and 
some occupants were reluctant to pull other people from the icy 
water for fear of capsizing their lifeboat.

• The decision to abandon ship was delayed while the captain and 

crew assessed damage. Had the captain started evacuation earlier, 
before people began to panic, more lifeboats may have been filled 
in a more orderly evacuation. 

What can you do?

(cid:206) Process plants may conduct many types of emergency drills. Fire, leak or spill 
response, shelter-in-place, evacuation, and severe weather are some common 
types. Be aware of your responsibility in each situation – it may be different.
(cid:206) In a drill or actual emergency, watch for others who may not remember what 
they should do, especially new employees, visitors and contractors. Help them to 
respond safely. 
(cid:206) Promptly report any problem you observe during a drill or emergency to your 
supervisor. Some examples – actions which cannot be done in the available time, 
things you can’t do safely because of the emergency condition, exit signs that can’t 
be seen or are confusing, emergency alarms or speakers that can’t be heard, 
required safety equipment which is not available or not working properly. Report 
your observations - it may save a life some day.
(cid:206) Take drills seriously and remind others that they should as well. Don’t think of 
drills as a time to see people from other units and let the drill become a social 
event. 
(cid:206) When you read about incidents in other industries, ask yourself if there is 
anything you can learn from what happened to make your plant safer!
(cid:206) Don’t let your plant “sink” due to a poor emergency plan or lack of knowledge 
of how to respond.

Not all Process Safety  lessons come from our industry!

AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, 

Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, and Vietnamese.

