http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Understand the Reactivity of Your Heat Transfer Fluid!

February 2011

This issue sponsored by

When thinking about chemical reaction 

hazards in your plant, remember to 
consider possible reaction between heat 
transfer fluids and your process materials 
in case of a leak in a heat exchanger, 
condenser, reboiler, reactor jacket or coil, 
or other heat transfer equipment.

A plant had an explosion in the outlet 

piping of an oxidation reactor which 
ruptured a 36 inch pipe. The explosion was 
caused by the reaction of nitrate salt, used 
as a heat transfer fluid to remove heat from 
the reactor, leaking into the piping where 
carbonaceous deposits had been trapped in 
a short dead-leg. Reactive chemical testing
indicated that the reaction resembled closely the decomposition of TNT explosive. Fortunately, 
nobody was injured. The incident showed that it was critical to avoid leaks of the nitrate salt, to detect 
leaks if they did occur, and to have a safe shutdown procedure if there was a leak.

While this incident involved a relatively reactive heat transfer fluid (nitrate salt), many process 

materials can react with common heat transfer fluids such as water, steam, brine solutions, ethylene 
glycol solutions, or heat transfer oils. The reactions may produce heat or generate gas and pressure.

What can you do?

• Make sure that your process hazard analysis studies consider the potential for leaks of non-process 
fluids, including reaction hazards. For example, consider heat transfer fluids; additives such as 
corrosion inhibitors or biocides in heat transfer fluids; lubricating oils used in pumps, agitators, 
compressors, or other rotating equipment; material which might drain into vessels from vent 
collection systems; and any other materials which might get into your process equipment.
• Know how to detect utility fluid leaks into your plant equipment – including reactors or heat 
exchangers that can have thousands of tubes and require rigorous maintenance and inspection 
procedures to prevent leaks. You need to know:

• How can you recognize that a leak into the process is occurring?
• If there is a leak, what specific changes will you see in the way your process behaves?
• Are there any specific process parameters which would provide useful information for 
detecting a leak?
• What should you do if you suspect a leak?

Don’t forget that heating and cooling fluids can be reactive with your process!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

