 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelNovember 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and Spansh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and SpanishishHurricane Katrina Hurricane Katrina ŒŒEmergency Response and Recovery Emergency Response and Recovery CCPS extends its CCPS extends its sympathy to all victims of sympathy to all victims of Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Katrina and other natural disasters other natural disasters throughout the world.throughout the world.Your Response to an Emergency Should Be No Accident!Did You Know?Did You Know?What You Can DoWhat You Can DoIn August 2005, Hurricane Katrina devastated the United States Gulf Coast causing over 1000 fatalities and billions of dollars in damage. Critical oil and chemical facilities were impacted by this storm. This storm, the 2004 Tsunami, and other natural events Œfloods, earthquakes, blizzards, tornadoes Œdemonstrate that none of us are immune to catastrophic impacts of a natural disaster. They remind us of the importance of emergency planning at all levels Œfrom a plant incident to a natural disaster impacting millions of people. Preparation and planning are essential to minimize damage, rescue victims, and recover from the disaster.Every facility Œplant, depot, warehouse, laboratory , office Œshould have a plan for emergency response for all types of natural and human caused incidents. Does yours include weather related incidents?Everybody has a role! Some are direct responders, such as members of the fire brigade, others are responsible for shutting down operations, still others are required to leave their work area to get out of danger. But, everyone has something they MUST do!Practice is essential to good emergency response. That is why we have fire drills and other tests. Follow up the drills with a critique Œwhat went well and what could have been done better?Learn your facility AND community emergency response plans and understand what you have to do.Participate in drills and take them seriously.Develop a personal emergency response plan for your family. Think about what kind of disasters could occur where you live Œhurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, fires, floods. Make sure everybody in your family knows where to go and how to get there. Think about how to get back in touch if you are separated.Excellent emergency response is a result of excellent preparation. So be READY!PSID Members see Free Search: HurricaneAftermath of an earthquake in Japan in 2003Fire after an earthquake in Turkey in 1999