This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

July 2011

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Recently there have been reports of incidents in the air 

transportation industry related to people falling asleep while required 
to perform critical jobs:

Shift Work

• On March 22, 2011, two airplanes landed at Reagan National 
Airport, Washington DC, around midnight without control tower 
clearance because the air traffic controller was asleep.

• On February 19, 2011, an air traffic controller working the midnight 
shift was tired and unable to remain awake, forcing his colleague to 
do multiple jobs in violation of procedures.

Most process industry plants operate 24 hours a day, and operators 

are required to work through the night, and to work rotating shift 
schedules. A disrupted sleep schedule resulting from shift work can 
cause sleepiness for many people, with potential for dangerous 
operating errors. Operating personnel must be alert and able to 
respond to potential problems at any time of the day or night!

There are things you can do to keep awake and alert when working 
at night. You should recognize the problem and take responsibility for 
getting enough quality sleep during the hours you are away from the 
plant. Your management also has a critical role to play in making sure 
that  work schedules allow you the opportunity to get the sleep you 
need.

14th Century German painting, “The Seven Sleepers”

Did you know?

Major process incidents can occur at any time 
of the day or night! Shift workers must always be 
alert and able to effectively respond to potential 
process incidents. Here are some examples of 
process incidents which occurred at night:
(cid:206) The 1984 Bhopal, India toxic gas release that 
killed thousands of people occurred shortly after 
midnight.
(cid:206) The 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster started 
with loss of control and an explosion at about 1 
AM.
(cid:206) The 1989 Exxon Valdez oil tanker grounding 
and oil spill occurred shortly after midnight.
(cid:206) The 2010 Deepwater Horizon explosion (top 
picture), which killed 11 people and caused the 
largest marine oil spill in history, occurred at 
about 10 PM.

What can you do?

People are not designed for irregular sleep patterns. Shift workers 

face frequent sleep disturbances which can cause excessive 
sleepiness. You can minimize the effects. Some examples:
(cid:206) Make sure you get enough quality sleep while you are away from 
work.
(cid:206) Make sure you have a good place to sleep during the day – dark, 
quiet, without disturbances.
(cid:206) Take a nap immediately before you go to work.
(cid:206) Work with others to help keep you alert.
(cid:206) Be active – take walks and move around as much as possible.
(cid:206) Don’t plan tedious or difficult tasks when you are likely to be 
most tired. Studies show that night shift workers are most sleepy 
around 4-5 AM.
(cid:206) If you are having problems staying awake, consult a doctor. You
may have a sleep condition that can be remedied. 
(cid:206) Search the Internet for more ideas on keeping alert while working 
at night and rotating shifts.

Make sure you get enough good quality sleep when working rotating shifts!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

