 What can you do?In April 2004, an explosion and fire at a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plant killed five people and severely injured three others. The explosion and fire destroyed most of the reactor building and an adjacent warehouse. Because smoke from the fire drifted over the community, authorities ordered an evacuation. The plant was never rebuilt. The United States Chemical Safety Board (CSB) issued a report and video on the incident:http://www.csb.gov/formosa-plastics-vinyl-chloride-explosion/The CSB investigation identified a number of root causes for this incident, including inadequate consideration of potential human error in the design and operation of the plant, failure to follow up on recommendations from a previous incident, reliance on procedures to prevent a major incident, and inadequate emergency response procedures for a large release of flammable materials.This Beacon focuses on the specific event which initiated the incident, which is something that you, as a plant operator or maintenance worker, can impact directly. The plant had 24 essentially identical batch polyvinylchloride reactors. At the end of a batch, the reactor was purged ofhttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelIf you can™t open a valve, don™t force it Œfind out why!AIChE © 2013. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Why can™t I open that valve?The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsJune 2013This issue sponsored bywww.iomosaic.comIf you try to operate a pneumatic or electric valve (open or close it), and it will not operate, stop and think. Perhaps there is a good reason why the valve will not operate. For example:ŁMaybe you are trying to operate the wrong valve!ŁThe valve may be prevented from operating because of a safety interlock.ŁThe valve may be locked out or de-energized because of some kind of maintenance work or other activity that requires equipment isolation or lockout.Never force a valve to operate directly by connecting the actuator to air or another type of power supply if the valve will not operate by its normal control system.If a valve will not open, and it has a bypass around it, do not use the bypass to establish flow until you understand why the valve won™t open.Contact your management and engineers and get help in investigating the reason that you are not able to operate the valve. Do not take any action until everybody understands why the valve will not operate.Do the same for any piece of equipment which you cannot operate Œa pump or agitator that you can™t start or stop, or any other piece of equipment which you cannot operate. Understand why, and never force equipment to operate.Watch the CSB video on this incident to understand all of the root causes and lessons.flammable and toxic vapors and cleaned with water. The water was then emptied to open sewer drains on the floor below the reactor. It is believed that the incident was initiated when an operator intended to drain water from a reactor which had been cleaned. However the operator went to the wrong reactor Œa reactor which was in the reaction stage. The reaction mixture, at an estimated pressure of 70 psig, contained flammable vinyl chloride. The operator was not able to open the pneumatic valve on the bottom of the reactor Œthere was a safety interlock which prevented opening the valve while the reactor was under pressure. It is believed that the operator connected a nearby air supply to the valve and forced it to open, releasing reaction mixture into the building. Flammable vapors from the released material ignited.