 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelAugust 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and Spansh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and SpanishishHere™s What HappenedHere™s What HappenedHow Did This Happen ?How Did This Happen ?What You Can DoWhat You Can DoSponsored Sponsored by by CCPSCCPSSupportersSupportersToxic Reaction in Sewer is FatalToxic Reaction in Sewer is FatalPSID Members see Free Search: Hydrogen sulfide; truck loading; truck unloading; sewer systemsThis accident investigated by and pictures provided by the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board. Visit their site at http://www.csb.govFifteen trucks of sodium hydrosulfide (NaSH) had been delivered to the facility in the previous 24 hours. Each truck is believed to have spilled about 5 gallons (19 liters) in to the collection pit. Construction employees were working in the area and needed to enter the collection pit. Operations drained the pit into what was believed to be the wastewater system. Instead, the pit drained in to a sewer line where sulfuric acid was present in quantities sufficient to react with the NaSH. As soon as the two chemicals mixed, they reacted and toxic hydrogen sulfide gas was released. The toxic gas escaped from the sewer system through the seal of a fiberglass manhole cover near the workers.Several construction employees working near a collection pit were overcome with hydrogen sulfide gas. The gas was released nearby when sodium hydrosulfide was accidentally mixed with sulfuric acid. Three workers collapsed almost immediately and three others tried to rescue them. Two of those rescuers also collapsed. In all, ten workers were exposed to the toxic gas. Two died and eight others were injured.ŁUse disposal systems only for the chemicals they are designed to handle. Recognize that trenches, sewers, and other disposal systems contain a variety of chemicals which can generate toxic gas or cause heat to be liberated if non-compatible materials are mixed. ŁUnderstand the expected reactions for accidentally mixing chemicals normally present at your site. Take special precautions for any reactions that produce toxic gas or liberate heat. If you have an interaction matrix, take time to understand it! Other hazardous gases that might easily be generated in a sewer include chlorine, sulfur dioxide, and carbon dioxide. Recognize that some toxic gases dull your sense of smell so you may have to react quickly.ŁSome disposal systems are designed to be sealed. Promptly report any leaks and missing seals to supervision for maintenance.ŁKnow your role in an emergency. NEVER NEVER try to rescue someone if you do not have the proper life saving rescue equipment and training.Disposal Systems Can Become Dangerous Reactors !