 Process Safety Beacon CCPS An AIChE Industry Technology Alliance Sponsored by 3M Company Security Œ It™s everybody™s Job After the attacks on September 11, 2001, when our nation's leaders told us "to remain vigilant", they were speaking to all of us. We have heard that chemical plants may be attractive targets for terrorists due to their potentially large impacts on neighboring communities, or by theft of chemicals. That makes us the front line of defense. The more watchful we all are, the greater chance that suspicious behavior can be spotted - and stopped - before harm can be done. We are not anti-terrorism experts but we can do a lot to protect ourselves, our companies, and our communities. These are difficult times. Our past practices and procedures may no longer address the new concerns raised by terrorist attacks. America has met these challenges in the past through the attention and determination of people just like you. Keep your eyes open, and if something doesn™t appear to be correct Œ ASK! AIChE © 2002. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps@aiche.org or 212-591-7319. http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htm Here is a quick list: All companies have security policies and practices Œ understand them, and practice them. Wear your employee badge, and note that your coworkers do the same. When you ﬁbadge inﬂ do not allow others to ﬁtailgateﬂ in on your pass. Park only where allowed. As you make your inspection rounds, keep your eyes open for potential weaknesses in the plant™s security. Look for anything out of place or different. Point these deficiencies out to your supervisor or the security department. Review your plant™s emergency procedures Œ evacuation, emergency response, etc. Pay attention to the required paperwork for contractors and visitors. If it doesn™t appear correct, contact your supervisor. Be particularly alert to new bulk shipment drivers. Housekeeping is a never-ending part of operations. If a plant is kept neat there are fewer places to hide something and small leaks can be easily detected and cleaned up before they become larger hazards. Check in-coming shipments for proper tamper seals. If they are missing, notify the proper person. That load may have been contaminated, or some of the contents stolen on the way to your location. Make sure all deliveries are handled according to your location™s procedures Œ especially those arriving outside normal receiving hours. Be careful what information you share with people outside your company. A lot of confidential information can be lost to someone who is overly curious. Some of these people will use the names of plant managers and others to appear to be trustworthy. Report any and all strange phone calls received to your supervisor. Following 9/11 several chemical plants received questionable calls inquiring about their operations. Don™t be embarrassed to raise any questions if you notice something different. We would all prefer to be safe than sorry. Messages for Manufacturing Personnel December 2002