 A plant was doing a pneumatic pressure test on a pipe connected to a tank. There was no blind flange between the piping being tested and the tank. The tank was isolated from the pressurized piping with a closed block valve. The block valve leaked, allowing the pressure from the pneumatic test to leak into the tank. The tank (which either did not have a pressure relief device installed, or the pressure relief device was too small) was overpressured, and it failed atthe bottom. The tank lifted into the air and came to rest on the top of the plant.Isolate equipment from pressure Œleave the rockets to the space program!What Happened?October 2007AIChE ©2007. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319We Have Liftoff!!!What can you do?Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelDuring pressure tests, or any other maintenance or non-routine activities involving pressure, make sure that all equipment is capable of withstanding the test pressure, is positively isolated from the source of pressure, or has adequately sized pressure relief devices for the testing conditions.Equipment can be protected from being overpressured more reliably by using blinds, or by physically disconnecting piping, rather than using valves to isolate the equipment from pressure.Do a process safety review before starting any non-routine operations to identify potential hazards and required safeguards during the operation.Keep workers away from the area where pressure testing operations are being conducted.If possible, pressure test lines using liquid pressure (hydrostatic pressure) rather than pneumatic (gas) pressure -the energy which can be released from a liquid overpressure is MUCH LESS than from a gas overpressure.