www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

What can I do?  I’m just the operator!

September 2012

This issue sponsored by

A frequent comment from workers is, “What can I do to improve safety 

of our processes? I am just the operator (or technician, mechanic, etc.).  I 
just turn valves, operate the equipment, take samples, turn wrenches, adjust 
the equipment.” It is true that operators and maintenance people can’t 
change the chemistry, redesign equipment, or change materials of 
construction. However, they have the best view of the process. They know 
how it behaves, how equipment fails, and under what conditions the process 
runs best. 

Yogi Berra was a baseball player who said, “You can observe a lot just 
by watching.” That is true of process safety! You can learn a lot by looking 
and listening. Unusual sounds may indicate an impending equipment 
problem. A dirty or wet spot on the floor or piping may warn of a small leak. 
We all know equipment problems and leaks do not fix themselves. Report 
what you see, write a repair order, or tell your supervisor. 

The pictures show examples of  problems you might observe in your 

plant.

The dust on this motor 
provides fuel for a fire and may 
be a dust explosion hazard!

A rusty, leaking pipe!

Is something leaking from this flange?

Bolts missing from a flange.

Could you open or 
close this rusty valve?

What can you do?

(cid:206) Understand your process and 
equipment. Know how it is supposed to 
work, and how to recognize when it is 
not working properly.
(cid:206) Be alert to things that are different –
noises, smells, drips, leaks, vibration. If 
something doesn’t seem right, tell 
somebody!
(cid:206) Fill out inspection sheets accurately. 
Even if a problem has been on the sheet 
for months, make sure it is noted again 
and point out to your supervisor how 
long it has been a problem.
(cid:206) Promptly report safety concerns – for 
example, missing guards, bolts, or  pipe 
hangers can cause serious injury or lead 
to an injury, spill, fire, or even a major 
catastrophe.
(cid:206) Use crew meetings and safety 
meetings to raise safety concerns, and 
listen when others voice their concerns.
(cid:206) Do your part. For example, when 
asked to review operating procedures or 
proposed changes, do it like your life 
depends on it. IT MAY!

(cid:197) Look 

for 

electrical 

and 

wiring 

problems.

Process safety depends on everybody!

AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, 

Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, and Vietnamese.

