 http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelInspect and maintain your containment dikes and pads!June 2010AIChE ©2010. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Containment Dikes and PadsSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.ŁPeriodically include containment dikes around storage tanks, sloped containment areas, and drainage trenches as part of your routine plant safety inspections. Look for physical damage, spilled material, accumulation of rain water in dikes, or blocked drainage. Look for debris, equipment, or anything which restricts flow of a spill.ŁMake sure that your plant procedures include pumping out or draining rain water from containment dikes Œif a dike is partly filled with rain water, it may not be able to contain a large spill.ŁIf you have any kind of valves or other piping to remove rain water from a containment dike, make sure these are closed or otherwise blocked when not being used.ŁIf you do any maintenance or construction work on a storage dike which results in damage to the integrity of the dike, make sure the damage is repaired before the job is finished.What can you do?Spill containment dikes for chemical storage tanksA sloped containment pad directs any spills from a truck unloading facility to a chemical sewer trench The arrow shows a hole in a containment dike. More damage can be seen at the base and the top of the dike wall.Other examples of damage include cracks in dike walls or floors, holes where pipes have been installed passing through dike walls, and anything else which would allow spilled material to flow out of the dike area. Most people recognize that containment dikes around storagetanks, and sloped containment pads for pumps, process buildings and structures, truck and rail car unloading areas, and other potential spill locations have an important environmental protection function Œpreventing contamination of soil and surface water. But, do you know that they often also have important safety functions? Some examples include:Łlimiting the spread of a fire and preventing exposure of other equipment if a flammable material spills and is ignitedŁpreventing contact of incompatible reactive materials in case of leak or spillŁlimiting the spread of spilled corrosive material and preventing contact with equipment which could be damaged by contact with the corrosive materialIn 2001, the US Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB) investigated a fire that destroyed a petroleum blending facility in Texas. Poor dike design and maintenance resulted in burning liquid spreading the fire from tank to tank, eventually engulfing the whole plant.