 As you work in the plant every day, you have opportunities to see potential security problems. Look for them, and report them. Here are a few examples, and you and your management can easily develop a much longer list:ŁSecurity lights which are not working, or are inadequate if they are workingŁBroken latches on gates or doors in the plant fenceŁLoose gates, or gates with large gaps under themŁGaps in or under fences, damage to fences, fences which are toolow, erosion of the ground under fencesŁObjects near fences on the outside which would assist in climbing over the fenceŁChains and locks improperly securedŁGates, doors, or windows on the outside boundary of the plant left open, or propped open.ŁGates or doors to the outside which get stuck without fully closingAlso, you should know and follow the security procedures at yourplant Œfor example:ŁAlways wear required identification badges, and, if you see somebody without proper identification, report it to your supervisor or security officers.ŁDon™t let other people borrow your plant access card or identification card.On this anniversary of terrorist attacks on the United States inSeptember 2001, we remember that such attacks have occurred in many other places throughout the world, before and after the New York and Washington attacks (for example, the Tokyo subway; London; Madrid; Bali, Indonesia; Ahmedabad, India; several attacks in Russia, many incidents in various countries in the Middle East). There are few countries which have not had experience with sabotage or terrorist attack. The hazardous nature of the materials handled in the process industries requires everyone™s vigilance to ensure that our plants are secure, to protect ourselves, our fellow employees, and our neighbors. IfPlant security is everybody™s responsibility!September 2008AIChE ©2008. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 212-591-7319Plant SecuritySponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.you work in a chemical storage or processing facility, you are in the best position to observe and address potential security vulnerabilities in your plant. As you go about your work, look for potential security problems, and report them to management so they can be corrected.A fence overgrown with bushes and treesCars parked near a fence can help intruders climb the fenceA lock on the web of a chain link fence Œnot as strong as if chained and locked around the fence post