This issue sponsored by

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Flammable Vapor Release Hazards in Congested Areas

August 2011

On February 7, 2010, six workers were killed and at least 50 others were injured in a natural gas explosion at a power 
plant under construction in Middletown, Connecticut, USA. The explosions resulted from planned work activities that led 
to large releases of flammable natural gas in the presence of workers and ignition sources.

At the time of the incident, workers were conducting a "gas blow," in which natural gas is forced through the piping at 
a high pressure and volume to remove debris, part of the commissioning and startup phase of the project. Natural gas was 
being blown from an open-ended pipe between two large structures in an area near the power generation building (1). 
This location, while outdoors, was congested because of surrounding power generation equipment (2). Efforts were made 
to eliminate or control potential ignition sources in the area. However, ignition sources remained, both outside and inside 
the building. The released natural gas found an ignition source and exploded (3).

This incident occurred during construction and startup of a power plant, and involved a large amount of flammable 

gas. However, it is not uncommon for many kinds of process plants to be required to vent flammable liquid or vapor 
from piping or equipment for maintenance or shutdown. Recent Beacons (January and May 2011) have discussed vapor 
cloud explosions outdoors and inside buildings. This incident is another example.

1

2

3

Did you know?

(cid:206) A congested area means an area which contains a lot 
of equipment, piping, structures, buildings, and even 
natural features such as irregular terrain or trees.
(cid:206) Release of a small amount of flammable vapor in a 
congested area can result in a dangerous vapor cloud.
(cid:206) The explosion of a flammable vapor cloud in a 
congested area is likely to be more violent and 
destructive than a similar vapor cloud explosion in a 
more open area.
(cid:206) The United States Chemical Safety Board (CSB) has 
recommended to industry and regulatory organizations 
that the practice of releasing flammable gas to the 
atmosphere for the purpose of fuel gas pipe cleaning be 
prohibited, and that alternate, non-flammable gases be 
used.

What can you do?

(cid:206) Do not assume that hazardous gas or vapor vented 
outdoors will disperse safely. Inspect the area and think about 
the effects of confinement.
(cid:206) If releasing flammable liquid or gas is unavoidable, vent 
to a safe location  away from personnel and ignition sources, 
preferably to a vent system designed to safely treat hazardous 
vapors. Avoid congested areas or other places where vapors 
could accumulate rather than disperse.
(cid:206) Do a thorough hazard analysis whenever hazardous 
material venting is necessary, to minimize the release, control 
potential sources of ignition, and safeguard people and 
property.
(cid:206) NEVER rely on your sense of smell to detect the presence 
of hazardous gas.
(cid:206) See the January and May 2011 Beacons for additional 
suggestions.

Never assume that outdoor release of flammable gas is safe!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

