 CCPSAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored by AIChEProcess Safety BeaconMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelMarch 2003Here™s What Happened:A thermally unstable material (a peroxide --but many chemicals have similar properties) was being fed from a weigh tank to a reactor. Normal practice is toempty the weigh tank, leaving the transfer piping empty. In this instance, a leak developed. A quick repair was expected so valves were closed leaving the pipe FULL of peroxide. The reactor temperature was well above the point at which the peroxide decomposes. Heat from thereactor slowly warmed the material in the piping as the repair effort continued past the expected completion time. The material finally reached its decomposition temperature. The result--overpressure that ruptured the piping. Luckily, there were no injuries, just a lot of surprised people. What Can I Do?This incident is a great example of how things can go wrong!ŁYou must be constantly aware of temperature when handling thermally sensitive materialsŁBlocking in unstable materials often invites an incidentŁRepairs can cause abnormal operations and new hazardsŁIf a material can be heated to its decomposition point, special procedures and precautions are neededŁHeat can come from almost anywhere, including connected equipment, the sun, heat tracing, mechanical energy, welding and– How Do I Know If I Have ﬁUnstable Materialsﬂ?ŁYou may already have theinformation in your own processsafety information (PSI) filesŁCheck the MSDSŠmany have aStability and/or Reactivity sectionŁCheck the manufacturer™s informationŠsometimes it™s thereŁNFPA or DOT hazard rating are often helpfulŁASKsomeone in technical or safety324OXReactive Chemistry: Not always whenUnstable materials need CONSTANT attentionŠespecially during non-routine operations!AIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.Contact us atccps@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319.http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmor whereyou wantit!