 http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelFive years ago, on March 23, 2005, a series of explosions occurred at an oil refinery in Texas City, Texas during the restart of a hydrocarbon isomerization unit. 15 workers were killed and 180 were injured. All fatalities and many of the injuries occurred in andaround trailers that had been placed near the isomerization unit to support maintenance activities on other units. A distillation column wasoverfilled and overpressurized. The relief valve opened, releasing hot hydrocarbon to the atmosphere through a vent stack to the atmosphere. This was not the first time a release had occurred from the vent stack, but this time the release was much larger. The resulting flammable vapor cloud ignited causing a massive explosion.This incident highlights the importance of the location of occupied buildings, both permanent and temporary, relative to highly hazardous processing facilities. In response to industry and public concern, the American Petroleum Institute (API) has created or updated two Recommended Practices on management of hazards associated with permanent (RP752) and portable (RP753) buildings.Be sure that your occupied buildings are safe!March 2010AIChE ©2010. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Facility SitingThe Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.While it is easy to think that facility siting and locationof occupied buildings are only a concern for management, there is alot that people working in the plant have to contribute. For example:ŁUnderstand your plant™s facility siting studies. Know which areas of your plant are off limits for temporary buildings. Make sure that any changes in building location, or in plant operations near occupied buildings, are thoroughly evaluated using the site Management of Change (MOC) process.ŁPoint out differences between facility siting studies and the wayWhat can you do?SponsoredSponsoredBy:By:(March 22(March 22--24, 201024, 2010San Antonio, Texas)San Antonio, Texas)Damage to portable trailers from the March 2005 Texas City explosionbuildings are actually used. For example, management may believethat a local control hut in the plant is used infrequently, but operators may know that it is actually regularly occupied for long periods of time. ŁDon™t seek refuge from a potential explosion in a building that is not designed for a blast. An explosion creates a pressure wave, and buildings which are not built to withstand an explosion are likely to be heavily damaged or completely destroyed. A person is more likely to be injured by the collapse of a building which is not blast resistant than by the same pressure wave in an open area. ŁAs soon as you become aware of a flammable material release which could create a flammable vapor cloud, follow your plant™s emergency procedures, including sounding evacuation alarms to ensure that non-essential personnel evacuate process units and nearby buildings.ŁAssure that nonessential personnel are not allowed in the process area during high hazard operations -for example, plant start-up, emergency shutdown, plant upsets.ŁInsist that process upsets that result in hazardous material releases are properly investigated and corrective actions taken.