www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Reporting and Investigating Near Misses

March 2018

On January 28, 1986 the US Space Shuttle Challenger exploded 

1

2

This issue sponsored by

73 seconds after launch from Cape Canaveral, Florida (1, 2). The 
Challenger was destroyed and all seven crew members were lost. 
The immediate cause was a leak of hot gas from a joint in the solid 
fuel rocket boosters. The hot gas impinged on the hydrogen fuel 
tank causing it to rupture and explode. Adjoining segments of the 
solid fuel rocket boosters were sealed with primary and secondary 
"O-rings" in the joints. Both seals on a joint failed because of low 
temperature on the launch day. There had been several prior 
launches in which the primary seal had failed, but the secondary 
seal successfully preserved the solid fuel rocket integrity. These 
prior failures were near misses that were not deemed serious 
enough for investigation.

Failure to report and investigate near misses has been a factor in 
process industry incidents as well. For example, on April 8, 1998 a 
runaway reaction overpressurized a 2000 gallon batch reactor (3) 
at a plant in New Jersey. The explosion and fire (4) injured 9 
workers, 2 seriously. Operators were unable to control the batch 
temperature using existing procedures and available cooling. In at 
least 6 previous batches, operators had been unable to control the 
temperature below the specified maximum, but the temperature did 
not get high enough for a runaway reaction. These prior near-miss 
incidents were not investigated.

Solid fuel rockets

Leaking solid fuel 

rocket joint

Shuttle Challenger

3

4

Do you know?

 Following a major process safety incident, investigators 

often find that there were previous warnings and near 
misses. If these had been reported, investigated, and 
investigation findings implemented, the major incident 
could have been prevented.

 We would all prefer to learn from near misses, where there 

were no injuries and damage was not significant, rather 
than from serious incidents.

 Near misses cannot be investigated if nobody reports them! 
Near misses will not be reported if people fail to recognize 
the incidents as near misses, or if they do not understand 
their significance.

 Safe process operation requires control of your process. If 

you are unable to control your process within specified 
safe operating limits for any critical process safety 
parameter you must recognize this as a near miss.

 Successful activation of any safety device or backup 

device should be considered a near miss. What if the safety 
or backup device had failed?

What can you do?

 Understand your plant’s incident and near miss 
reporting and investigation system. If your plant 
doesn’t have such a system, suggest to your 
management that they implement a system.
 Report all near misses, including failure to 

control your process within safe operating limits 
and operation of safety or backup systems.

 Don’t assume that supervisors, managers, and 

technical staff will observe near miss events by 
reading shift logs, instrument records, or other 
process data. A plant generates a lot of data, and 
these events might be missed. If you recognize a 
near miss, it is your responsibility to make sure 
management is aware of it.

 If you are not sure if something is a near miss, 
report it anyway. Also, think about “how bad 
could it have been” to help identify a near miss.
 Volunteer to participate in investigations of near 

misses and incidents in your plant.

Your plant is talking to you through near misses – is anybody listening?

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

