www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Hazards from Abandoned Equipment

This issue sponsored by

September 2011

www.iomosaic.com

September 2011

•

•

In a Texas refinery in February 2007, propane 
leaked from cracked control station piping which 
had been out of service for 15 years. A huge fire 
resulted (pictures), injuring four people, 
evacuating the refinery, shutting it down for 2 
months, and causing losses of $50 million. You can 
read more about this incident in the October 2008 
and May 2010 Beacons.
In a food processing plant, piping was taken out of 
service because of asbestos insulation, but the 
piping was left in place. Eventually the block 
valves leaked resulting in product contamination.

• Water leaked into an abandoned electrical box 
causing a ground fault and a power system trip.
• A process using phosphorus trichloride (PCl3), a 
highly water-reactive material, was shut down. A 
PCl3 tank was supposed to be emptied and left in 
place. It was not completely emptied. Several 
years later there was a leak. The PCl3  reacted with 
water  on the ground to create a toxic hydrogen 
chloride cloud. 

Did you know?

What can you do?

 Plants often stop using equipment, piping, and 
even entire plants or production units for weeks, 
months, or even years. This can be because of 
economic conditions, seasonal variation in product 
demand, or changes in the process.
 Equipment which is not in use must be isolated 
from operating equipment, emptied of all 
chemicals, and de-energized. Your plant should 
have lock out – tag out procedures to provide 
guidance on what should be done.
 When a process is modified and equipment is 
removed from service, it may be isolated during the 
plant modifications with the intent to remove it 
later. But, is it really ever removed? Is the old 
equipment left in place, rusting and deteriorating?

 Always do a management of change review when removing 
equipment from service, either temporarily or permanently, or  
when removing abandoned equipment. Consider what isolation, 
de-inventorying, and de-energizing is required for equipment not 
in use. Follow your plant’s lock out – tag out procedures.
 Make sure that equipment which is abandoned with the 
intention of “removing it later” is actually removed.
 Raise management awareness of unused piping or equipment. 
You may know about piping or equipment which is no longer 
used and has been forgotten. 
 Periodically inspect equipment which is out of service to 
ensure that it doesn’t create a hazard to operating equipment, or 
the environment. Look for signs of damage, corrosion, or leakage. 
Pay special attention to block valves, blinds, and other devices 
which isolate out of service equipment from operating equipment.

Manage change when abandoning and removing equipment!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

