 Process Safety Beacon CCPS An AIChE Industry Technology Alliance Messages for Manufacturing Personnel –.AND HE BLEW THE HOUSE DOWN What is an explosion? There are lots of definitions, but the explosion above resulted from a basic combustion process. There were three steps: release of a combustible material (hydrogen in this case) accumulation of that material in a ﬁcloudﬂ, and then an ignition source provides the ﬁsparkﬂ for combustion. Obviously, the larger the accumulation, the larger the explosion! So, what do you do? In this incident, a good ventilation system would likely dilute the small amounts of escaping hydrogen to maintain a concentration below the lower flammable limit Œ ﬁdilution is the solutionﬂ! Indoor battery charging operations MUST take hydrogen generation rates into account, and an appropriately designed ventilation system installed, operated and maintained. What about hydrogen? Hydrogen is an interesting gas, it is very ﬁlightﬂ (it will rise quite rapidly in air) and has a very wide range of flammability. A large number of hydrocarbons are combustible in a range of 2-15%; hydrogen is combustible in a range of 4-74% (by volume), which is very wide by comparison. Also, the amount of energy required to ignite a hydrogen cloud is very low. These properties, in many respects, make hydrogen an ideal material for explosions in areas where it can be confined. Here™s what happened– The picture here is the typical result of an event that happens hundreds of times every year Œ an explosion In this case, the ﬁfuelﬂ was believed to be hydrogen generated from the computer backup battery charging system seen in the background. Ventilation of this relatively small portion of the 50,000 square foot building was either not working or poorly designed. The small amounts of hydrogen released during the battery charging operation apparently accumulated and then an ignition source led to the explosion. As you can see, the roof was blown off (about 400 square feet), the damage is extensive - but, no one was in the building so Œ luckily - no injuries. A typical event, happens all the time! Whenever a flammable substance is present in a confined area, release of that material creates a potential explosion scenario. May 2002AIChE © 2002. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps@aiche.org or 212-591-7319. http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htm PSID Members refer to incidents: *120, *245, *327