 In Remembrance of SEPTEMBER 11th, 2001 The Incident September brings memories of the events of September 11, 2001: the tragic loss of life, the destruction to the World Trade Center and Pentagon, the bravery of the passengers who brought down the plane in Pennsylvania, the heroism of the emergency response personnel. Far too many items to list here, but a day we will remember for the rest of our lives. What has happened since? The US government, organizations, and individual companies have taken a number of actions. For personnel who work in facilities with hazardous chemicals, these include: American Chemistry Council (ACC) has added a Security Code to Responsible Care; other trade groups are taking similar steps, CCPS has published a document describing how to conduct a Security Vulnerability Analysis (SVA). This method, or one which is similar, can be used to assess your site™s security risks. ACC sites must complete this task prior to year end 2003, and A number of groups are offering training classes on issues impacting chemical site security. What can I do? Be alert! Know who is in your area and why they are there. Watch for out-of-place objects - a clean, orderly facility makes this easier to accomplish. Be aware! Take time to tour your workplace. ACTIVELY look for unusual items or people Œ if you see anything that seems out of place notify management or your security group. Be informed! Understand and follow your location™s security practices. Pay special attention to your site access control system. Everyone should follow these rules on site, including visitors and contractors. Be smart! The world can be a very unfriendly place - September 11 tragically demonstrated this to all people worldwide. We, as individuals, must be suspicious of actions and things around us. Be ESPECIALLY cautious in areas that contain very hazardous materials. Anything unusual in these areas should be reported immediately. Process Safety Beacon CCPS An AIChE Industry Technology Alliance Sponsored by AIChE™s SVA Training Program AIChE © 2002. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps@aiche.org or 212-591-7319. http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htm Messages for Manufacturing Personnel September 2002