http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel
Undetected ball valve failure

March 2019

This issue sponsored by

PIT Removed 
for Calibration

PIT Removed 
for Calibration

Units 1 and 2 share a common line to the 
thermal oxidizer (TO). Calibration was due on 
several instruments on unit 2. A hand valve was 
closed and locked out, and a pressure 
transmitter (PIT) was removed for calibration.  

A day or two after unit 2 was locked out, unit 1 began venting 
toxic gas through the shared line to the thermal oxidizer. The 
material venting from unit 1 flowed through the vent line 
toward unit 2. However, the material exited through the valve 
where the pressure transmitter had been removed. 

Upon investigation, it was 
discovered the ball inside the valve 
was in the open position, even 
though the valve handle was in the 
closed position. (Note: When 
moved, the valve handle “felt” like a 
properly operating valve.) 
Fortunately, there were no injuries, 
but had this event happened on 
another system, injuries could have 
occurred 

No blind 
on open 
line

Did you know?

What you can do

• Any valve can fail, and there are many ways it 

• Use blinds, plugs or caps when piping will be 

can fail!

open, even temporarily.

• Valve handles may not always indicate the actual 
position of a valve. A failure of the handle, stem, 
ball, or seat can cause a problem

• What happens in one system can affect another 
and must be considered when altering a system, 
even temporarily.

• Use the line break/opening procedures for those 
operations, and if line break procedures are not 
accurate – get them corrected

• Consider the effects of interconnected systems 

and always ‘walk the line’ before transferring 
material.

All valves can fail.  Consider double isolation.

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any commercial 
purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, 
Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

