 What can you do?A piece of debris fell from temporary scaffolding used to support people and material. It fell onto the straight handle of a quarter turn ball valve on a ¾-inch (about 20 mm) vent on a large process pipe. The falling debris caused the vent valve to open. The large pipe contained flammable material, which was released through the vent. The released material ignited. The resulting fire killed one contract worker and seriously burned two others.When the incident occurred, there was no cap or plug on the vent line from the process pipe. The quarter turn ball valve was the only thing preventing a hazardous release of flammable material.This incident occurred because something fell onto the valve and opened it. Can you think of other ways this valve might have leaked or been accidentally opened?http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelDon™t let a single failure cause a serious incident!AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Caps and Plugs -One Day You Will Miss Them!The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.This issue sponsored byYou should have more than one barrier between a hazardous material and the outside environment or the workplace. A single leaking or accidentally opened valve should not result in a dangerous release of hazardous material.It is easy to forget to replace caps or plugs on vents or drains from process pipes. Usually the person who removes the cap or plug intends to come back and replace it later, but everybody in a process plant is very busy and it can be forgotten.There can be a dangerous release of hazardous material, flammable or toxic, through a very small pipe.www.iomosaic.comwww.aiche.org/ccpsDecember 2011Did you know?Always replace all caps and plugs on vent pipes, drain pipes, sample pipes, or other caps/plugs that you need to remove to do a job. The job is not finished until you return all equipment to its original condition.Look for missing or damaged plugs and caps on pipe connections in your plant, and make sure they are replaced or repaired.Don™t forget that some vent valves are intended to be open (not plugged or capped) Œfor example the vent on a double block and bleed isolation. If you are not sure whether a cap or plug is needed, ask somebody who understands the design of the piping!Look for places where a single leaking or accidentally opened valve could result in a hazardous release of material or pressure. Report them and make sure that some kind of back up is provided Œfor example, a cap, plug, blind, or a second isolation valve.Consider alternate placement of the valve handles on vents or drains so they cannot be accidentally opened by leaning or stepping on them.Consider other types of vent valve instead of a ¼-turn ball or plug valve Œfor example, a diaphragm, globe, or gate valve, which is less likely to be accidentally opened. Be sure to do a management of change review before making any modifications to a drain or vent.