 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceCCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceInvestigated byPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelAugust 2004Here™s What Happened:CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2004. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSHow Did this Happen?PSID members see Free SearchŠhoseChlorine was being transferred from a railroad tank car when the transfer hose burst. Both automatic and manual emergency shutdown systems failed so the release was unabated for about three hours. Approximately 48,000 pounds (21,800 kg) of chlorine escaped before emergency responders were able to stop the release. They entered the chlorine cloud wearing ﬁClass Aﬂ safety gear and climbed on top of the car to close the manual shut off valves. Near by neighbors either evacuated or ﬁsheltered-in-place.ﬂ The adjacent Interstate was closed to traffic for 1 ½ hours. Of the 63 people that sought medical evaluations due to respiratory distress, 3 were hospitalized. The release also damaged trees and other vegetation in the area.The ruptured hose should have had an inner Teflon liner reinforced with a Hastelloy C-276 exterior metal braiding. Instead, the exterior metal support braiding was stainless steel and was easily corroded by chlorine permeation through the Teflon liner. The hose failed after less than 2 months of service. Both the purchase and shipping papers indicated that the hose was constructed of the proper materials, but it was not tested or verified upon receipt.An emergency shut down system activated by an employee before evacuation failed to work because of severe build up on the valve ball.Chlorine Transfer Hose FailureSee the CSB investigation report summary on their web site, http://www.csb.gov/completed_investigations/docs/CSB_DPCFinalDigest.pdfWhat YOU Can DoKnow what to do in an emergency! Always check to ensure that emergency shutdown equipment has a current test tag. If it does not, report it. Test the entire shut down loop before you rely on it. Your jobŠmake sure it will work when needed!Conduct a pre-use check before using any replaceable equipment, such as hoses, sample containers, instruments, etc. to be sure that they are fit for the service. If in doubtŠdo not use it!When receiving new equipment make sure that it is exactly what was ordered. Some materials are difficult to tell from others, but performance may be significantly different!Ask for ﬁpositive materials identificationﬂ testing where different materials look alike. This is especially important where a mix-up can lead to a hazardous event. Make this part of the area™s process hazards analysis.Make Sure What You Install is Adequate for the ServiceU.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation BoardU.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Boardhttp://www.csb.govChlorine gas cloudThis edition is also available in German, French, Spanish, Portuguese and Chinese. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.