www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Aging Process Facilities and Infrastructure

May 2018

This issue sponsored by

Aging process equipment, facilities, and infrastructure are a 

1

safety concern in the process industries. In 2010 there was a violent 
explosion at an oil refinery in the state of Washington, USA (1). A 
heat exchanger shell failed catastrophically, and there were seven 
fatalities. The exchanger had been in service for almost 38 years and 
cracks had developed in the carbon steel shell after continuous 
exposure to hydrogen at high temperature and pressure. The failure 
mechanism (high temperature hydrogen attack) was not well 
understood when the refinery was built, and the cracks had not been 
detected when the shell was last inspected twelve years earlier.

In another incident, the roof of an ore processing plant collapsed onto the gallery below causing significant 

damage to process equipment. Fortunately, there were no injuries. Beams on the underside of the roof had been 
exposed to steam releases from equipment below for nearly twenty years. Snow and rain on the roof caused the 
steam to condense and corrode the beams. The roof finally collapsed one winter under a heavy snow load. No one 
in the plant had been assigned responsibility for maintaining the building. Operators did not routinely look beyond 
the process equipment. This incident shows the importance of maintaining all facilities and infrastructure, even if 
the equipment does not directly contact process chemicals.

2

3

4

Examples of aging 
equipment:

2. Silos

3. Separation 

equipment

4. A riveted tank car

Did You Know?

What Can You Do?

 Aging affects the condition and integrity of all 
process equipment, facilities, and infrastructure.

 Ensure that all facilities and equipment are operated 

within specified safe operating limits.

 Prolonged exposure to normal operating conditions, 

 Report any deviations from safe operating limits to 

and occasional upsets, can cause equipment to 
deteriorate, making it more prone to failure.
 Many plants are now operating at rates and 

conditions not anticipated at the time of their initial 
construction.

 Aging does not necessarily relate to how old a 

facility or piece of equipment might be. It is really 
about how well it has been operated and 
maintained. Aging is about change and this requires 
constant awareness and vigilance by workers in an 
industrial facility. 

management so that technical experts can evaluate the 
potential impact of the deviation on the equipment.

 Look for any unusual conditions or signs of equipment 
deterioration in your daily plant or facility inspections. 
 Look beyond your immediate area of responsibility as 

you travel about the plant. For example, inspect 
loading racks, and railway sidings, pipe bridge 
supports, building structural steel, and other 
infrastructure which can be missed in formal 
inspections. 

 Report any concerns to your supervisor or foreman.

Aging equipment requires extra care!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

