Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 20 
 

EMPLOYEES HANDS CAUGHT IN UNSECURED CARGO BOX LID 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently an incident occurred involving an unsecured lid of a cargo box.  The crewmembers opened the cargo 
box to begin unloading supplies.  There was no locking bar on this box, only a welded chain, which allowed the 
box to be opened to a position that it would not fall closed.  One of the chain loops twisted and rolled under the 
welded loop.  This took out some of the chain slack that was needed to allow the lid to be opened to the safe 
position.    This  allowed  the  box  lid  to  fall,  striking  the  employee  on  top  of  his  hands.    The  injured  employee 
sustained a minor injury.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The cargo box did not have a safety latch to lock the lid in the open position.  There was no step in the JSA to 
ensure that the box was equipped with a locking bar.  Once the box was identified to not have a locking bar, 
no one was assigned to hold the lid open while the box was being unloaded. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  All  rigs  will  immediately  inspect  the  cargo  boxes  on  their  rigs  to  ensure  that  they  are  equipped  with  the 

proper safety locking bar system.  They will report the results to their respective Operations Managers.  

•  All boxes will be sent in to the company’s shore base facility, where they will be inspected by Operations 

and Engineering and then be fitted with a locking bar system.  

•  Each  cargo  box  will  be  identified  with  a  number  and  it  will  be  logged  onto  a  spreadsheet  with  its 

dimensions and destination from where it will be tracked as to which rig it is sent to. 
 Reinforce  item  relating  to  cargo  boxes  in  the  Crane  Operations  section  of  the  Rig  Condition  and 
Compliance Audit, which clearly asks if the cargo box has a locking mechanism. 

• 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2004 

