Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 08 
 

LTI—STRUCK BY FLOWLINE AND FALL IN SUBSTRUCTURE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  crew  was  rigging  down  the  flow-line  that  extended  from  the  bell  nipple  to  the  shaker.    Two  pad  eyes 
providing for a balanced hoist of the flow-line were available to hook up to, but a chain was attached to only 
one  pad  eye,  resulting  in  an  unbalanced  load.    The  Dresser®  sleeve  was  knocked  loose  and  the  flow-line 
pivoted from the unbalanced hookup.  The unsupported end of the flow-line swung down, striking a floorman 
standing on a lower beam, causing him to fall two meters (6 feet).  The fall resulted in three cracked ribs.   

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  There was a lack of communication, no pre-job or JSA discussion.   
2.  Personnel didn’t share with each other the hazards involved in the “plan” devised for removing the flow-

line.  The hazard of an unbalanced crane pick-up / lift was not recognized.   

3.  The  injured  was  standing  below  the  flow-line,  exposing  himself  to  the  dropped  object  or  uncontrolled 

release of the energy source (gravity), and no one recognized the hazard.   

4.  The  100%  tie-off  rule  was  not  followed,  and  the  injured  was  exposed  to  working  above  two  meters 

without fall protection. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Good communications are essential to performing the job safely.   
2.  The  safety  tools  are  in  place,  such  as  pre-job  safety  meetings,  JSAs,  Hazard  Recognition  techniques 

(ABBI, STOP™ Observation Card, and Energy Sources).   

3.  Using  these  techniques  takes  time,  but  that’s  a  part  of  making  safety  equal  to  cost,  efficiency  and 

productivity.   

4.  Management  must  follow-up  frequently  with  the  injured  to  see  how  he  is  doing  or  if  anything  has 

changed since the incident.   
Instruct personnel that when injured, to relay to your supervisor (medic) any changes in how you feel.  

5. 
 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2008 

