Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 - 19  
 

DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
Upon  returning  home  from  an  international  trip,  an  employee  was  hospitalized  for  Deep  Vein  Thrombosis 
(DVT).    He  was  admitted  for  approximately  one  week  and  was  prescribed  preventative  medications  for 
several months.  When other employees within the company were notified, via an internal alert, of the risks of 
DVT, additional employees within the organization also reported that they, or those they work with, have also 
experienced DVT during the past year. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
DVT is the formation  of a  blood clot  in  a  deep  vein  which  usually  affects the leg or  pelvis.   DVT has been 
seen in some people after long haul flights.  Research shows that the development of a DVT is probably due 
to a combination of dehydration and immobility, as well as other risk factors such as: coronary heart disease, 
obesity, cigarette smoking, pregnancy, taking a high dose combined oral contraceptive pill, family history of 
DVT,  or  a  recent  surgery  or  injury.    It  is  also  possible  to  develop  a  DVT  during  prolonged  periods  of 
immobility such as a long drive or sitting at the computer for extensive periods of time without moving. 

 

tenderness 
swelling with one calf much larger than the other 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
The  company  provided  all  employees  with  information  on  the  causes  and  symptoms  of  DVT  as  well  as 
preventative measures that travelers can take:   
 
The symptoms of DVT, often in the calf, are: 
• 
redness 
•  warmth 
• 
• 
 
The most  serious  complication  of  a  DVT  is  the  potential  for  it  to  develop  into  a  pulmonary  embolism.  This 
occurs when the DVT dislodges from the leg and travels into the vessels of the lungs.  This very dangerous 
condition can affect a person’s ability to breathe and can be fatal.   
 
To treat a DVT, the patient is usually placed on a course of blood
 
As  far  as  prevention  goes,  the  best  thing  to  do  is  keep  moving!    If  you  have  any  of  the  risk  factors 
above, you should speak to your doctor about obtaining a pair of compression stockings to wear whenever 
you will be immobile for a long period of time, such as on your next long drive or flight.  Drink plenty of water 
and avoid dehydrating alcohol, coffee and energy drinks and.  Get up and walk around as often as possible.  
Also, please see the next page for some calf exercises to improve circulation and prevent DVT. 
 
IADC Note: See IADC Alert:  10 – 35  

thinning medication to dissolve the clot.  

‐

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2012 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Recommended Exercises to Prevent DVT 

1.  Ankle Circles 

•  Lift feet off the floor.  Draw a circle with the toes, simultaneously moving one foot clockwise and the 

other foot counterclockwise.  Reverse circles.  Rotate in each direction for 15 seconds.  Repeat if 
desired. 

2.  Foot Pumps (Foot motion is in three stages.) 

•  Start with both heels on the floor and point feet upward as high as you can.  Put both feet flat on the 

floor.  Lift heels high, keeping balls of feet on the floor.  Repeat these three stages in a continuous 
motion and in 30

second intervals. 

 

‐

3.  Knee Lifts 

each leg. 

•  Lift leg with knee bent while contracting your thigh muscle.  Alternate legs.  Repeat 20 to 30 times for 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2012 

 

 

 

 

