Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 08 
 

RABBITING TUBING WITH RIG AIR RESULTS IN AN MTO 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Tubing  was being laid down and “rabbited” on the pipe rack.  (“Rabbit” means to run a device (small plug) 
through  a  pipe  or  tubing  to  clean  or  test  for  obstructions.)    To  “speed  up”  the  operation  the  rig  personnel 
decided to blow the rabbit through the tubing with rig air (120 psi).  A hose was attached to the box thread 
protector.  The rabbit went through the tubing and bumped against the pin protector on the other end.  The 
air pressure built up and the box end protector blew off the tubing striking an employee on the knee resulting 
in an injury that required seven stitches.   

The company previously had an identical incident where a roustabout was struck in the abdomen by the pipe 
protector and rabbit.  This resulted in disemboweling him and shattering his hip.  Eleven years later, he is still 
undergoing therapy for the injury.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Procedure for ”rabbiting” was not defined.   
•  No pre-job safety meeting or JSA was used to help identify the risks associated with using rig air to blow 

the rabbit through the tubing.   

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  When changing a procedure, a safety meeting should be conducted, with the JSA reviewed and changed 
or a new one developed.  This must take place to identify the hazards and risks present in the changed 
procedure. 

•  Air pressure applied to the total per square inch area is significant.  In this case the potential pressure 

was approximately 1,150 pounds of force on the thread protector. 

•  Since  the  previous  incident  many  drilling  contractors  in  the  region  have  developed  procedures  for 
rabbiting that includes pulling the rabbit through tubulars with a shop vacuum.  There have not been any 
incidents using this procedure.)   

•  A  company  wide  rabbiting  procedure  was  developed  that  didn’t  include  use  of  rig  air.    This  procedure 
and alert were shared company-wide, allowing a proactive response in each company division, ensuring 
“rabbiting” with rig air is not a part of the company’s “rabbiting” procedures.   

Message:  Changing a procedure should be reviewed by all involved, including supervisors.  

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2010 

