Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 35  
 

IMPROPER HAND TOOL USE RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  carpenter  was  sawing  wood  using  a  portable  electric  circular  saw  mounted  in  a  table.    He  was  cutting 
pieces of 7.2 cm (3”) wide and 2 meters (6.6 feet) long wood.  While he was doing so a gust of wind carrying 
sand  blew  on  his  face and  some sand went  in his eyes.  He immediately tried to wipe his eyes with his left 
hand while his right hand remained on the wood.  He suddenly realized that his right hand was too close to the 
blade  and  when  he  reacted  by  trying  to  remove  his  right  hand,  the  top  of  his  hand  contacted  with  the  saw 
blade resulted in a fracture of point and middle fingers and deep cut on his thumb.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  weather  was  windy  and  dusty.    There  was  a  misuse  of  equipment  and  tools,  a  skill  saw  was  mounted 
upside  down  into  a  home  made  saw  table.    The  table  was  constructed  in  such  a  way  that  it  prevented  the 
tool’s safety guard from operating.  The power handsaw was not designed to be mounted upside down in a 
table.    There  was  also  inadequate  leadership/supervision  and  the  workers  lacked  adequate  knowledge/skill.  
Commitment and Leadership, Risk Management, and Design & Planning were found to be lacking at the site.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Actions to prevent reoccurrence and instructions to rig supervisors:  
 
•  Stop using any similar home made tables on all the Rigs. 
•  Stop similar operations until appropriate equipment is available 
•  Purchase the appropriate table saw with protection guard and emergency shut down switch. 
• 

If it is necessary to have a carpenter workshop on location, improve the carpenter workshop by either 
relocating it or modifying it to minimize the environmental effects of wind and dust. 

•  Discuss this accident in the safety meeting and highlight the importance of using Hazard-Identification for 

jobs, which are carried out outside the rig environment.  

•  Review all power tools used on rig and campsites and create a hazard risk assessment of their operations 

and ensure that they are used in the correct manner. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2003 

