 

SAFETY 
ALERT 

 
ALERT 1-18:  WIRELINE TOOL MANIFOLD SHEARS – RESULTING 
IN DROPPED OBJECT  
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

While making up a wireline tool assembly, the rig heaved while the wireline string was being 
lowered by a rig floor winch. As the rig heaved, a needle valve bleed off manifold on the Coil 
Tubing Lift Frame (CTLF) made contact with the tool string lifting bridle. Upon contact with the 
bridle, the needle valve bleed off manifold sheared off at the threaded coupling and fell directly 
to the rig floor. The needle valve bleed off manifold weighed 7lb. and fell 30ft. No injury to 
personnel resulted from this incident. 
 

 

 
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 

The needle valve manifold had been put together in a linear fashion and protruded too much 
from the lubricator (approx. 18”). This had not been identified as a hazard by the Service 
Provider or the rig crews.  The requirement for; and method of pulling back and securing the 
lubricator to the CTLF was not specified in the procedure. Not securing the lubricator to the 
CTLF allowed lateral movement of the lubricator which contributed to its close proximity to the 
tool string. 
 
LESSONS LEARNED: 

  There was no secondary retention fitted to the valve manifold at the time of the incident. 
On the initial rig-up secondary retention had been fitted.  However following various rig-
ups the secondary retention had been omitted.  This omission had not been identified 
through subsequent dropped object inspections.  

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

 

 

 

  The requirement to ensure that Service Providers had a daily dropped object prevention 

checklist (to include secondary retention) prior to installing Service Provider temporary 
equipment at height was not followed. 

  The Service Provider did not have a dropped object inspection checklist for this rig-up. 
  Following the incident, it was possible to fit a right-angle fitting and rig up the needle 

valves in such a way that the protrusion was reduced considerably and the majority of 
the valves could be operated from the rig floor without the need for man-riding. Valves 
and gauges are now located at the bottom of the hose at drill floor level as per the 
picture below.  

 

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

