Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 41 
 

NEAR MISS – DROPPED CASING WHEN ELEVATORS NOT LATCHED 

CORRECTLY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A Near Miss incident occurred when a joint of 13 3/8 inch casing fell down the V-door and continued off the 
catwalk,  when  the  single  joint  casing  elevators  (SJE)  were  not  latched  and  pinned  correctly.    The  incident 
occurred on the 60th joint of casing that was run, using a casing running tool.  With the winch line and sling 
removed from the joint of the casing, the Driller was signaled to pick up the casing.  When the weight was 
taken up on the casing elevators, the elevators opened and the casing fell out and eventually came to rest 
against the wire line unit off of the catwalk.   
 
The consequence of this incident was slight damage to the wire line unit but with potential for a fatality.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A check of the casing elevators after the incident, acknowledged that the elevators did not fail and that the 
cause  of  the  incident  was  human  error.    The  investigation  team  established  that  the  SJE  were  partially 
latched.  This left enough room to insert the pin behind the latching device, instead of its proper position in 
front of the latching device, acting as a retaining safety pin.  The safety retainer pin was still inserted after 
the  incident.    The  worker  latching  the  elevators  on  the  rig  floor  did  not  know  the  elevators  were  not  fully 
latched. 
 
•  The Driller was not able to see the casing on the V-door or the elevators from the driller’s console.  His 
vision was obstructed by four stands of 8 inch Bottom Hole Assembly (BHA) and four rows of drill pipe 
which was stacked in the fingers on the driller’s side derrick, because the off driller side was full of drill 
pipe.  The driller relied on a “thumbs up” signal to pick up the blocks. 
It  is  not  possible  for  the  latch  to  open  on  the  casing  elevators  if  latched  and  pinned  correctly.    It  is 
possible to not fully latch the casing elevators, allowing sufficient room to insert the retainer pin behind 
the latch. 

• 

•  There  was  no  second  person  assigned  to  check  if  the  casing  elevators  were  latched  and  pinned 

correctly. 

•  The JSA reviewed prior to commencement of the job was a generic JSA and made no reference to the 
hazard  of  the  elevators  not  latching,  or  the  requirement  for  a  second  person  to  check  for  proper 
attachment.  

•  The rig was not equipped with any form of secondary safety device i.e. stopper bar at the base of the V-

door to prevent casing etc. from sliding down the V-door through the catwalk as it did in this case.  

Drillers 
Console 
(Station) 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Casing  elevators  changed  out  for  a  type  considered  to  have  a  better  latching  device.    Pin  inserted 

through not in front of the latch. 

•  Procedures to be reviewed and amended so that: 

•  A  second  person  is  assigned  to  check  that  the  elevator  is  latched  correctly  and  the  pin  is  inserted 

correctly. 

•  Driller must have a clear view to the V-door at all times.  When the pipe of bottom hole assembly is 
racked in the fingers, it will prevent this.  The pipe should be racked differently to allow a clear view 
or laid down when this is not achievable. 

•  A  rig-specific  JSA  is  to  be  developed  which  outlines  all  the  potential  hazards  identified  in  the 

investigation report. 

•  A “stopper” device design, to be agreed by Management, which when fabricated and fitted, will prevent 

pipe or casing travelling down the catwalk uncontrollably if there is a elevator failure or human error 

 
 
IADC Note:  For additional information review IADC Alert 01-04.   
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2008 

