Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 12 

“STRUCK BY INCIDENT” ON MONKEY-BOARD 

RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
It was decided to pull three stands of 5” drill pipe out of the hole.  Since the derrickman was unavailable, a 
floorman was assigned to work the monkey-board to rack back the drill pipe stands.  The floorman unlatched 
the drill pipe from the elevators and used the remotely operated derrick winch to pull the drill pipe back to 
rack  it.    As  the  driller  commenced  lowering  the  travelling  block,  the  winch  wire  suddenly  became  slack 
allowing the drill pipe to move into the path of the descending top drive system (TDS), making contact with it.  
The impact caused the drill pipe to deflect and move toward the other side of the monkey board; pulling the 
winch wire along with it.  The floorman, was hit at the abdomen by either the pipe and the winch wire or only 
by  the  wire.    While  the  injured  person  was  under  medical  attention  and  monitoring  by  the  rig  doctor,  he 
succumbed to his injuries about two hours after the incident.  Photos below are a recreation of the incident. 
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Drill pipe stand was in the path of descending top drive.  
2.  Driller did not observe the 5 inch drill pipe moving back towards the descending top drive. 
3.  There was poor communication between the personnel involved in the operations.  
4.  The winch cable became slack allowing the drill pipe to move toward the path of the descending top 

drive.  

5.  Lack of proper competency assessment of the floorman assigned to derrick duties.  
6. 
 

Inadequate Risk Assessment. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives: 
 
1.  Driller shall maintain line of sight with the derrickman and monkey board along with the monitor, which 

displays the monkey board area to ensure that no obstruction is in the path of the top drive system prior 
to ascending / descending.  

2.  Driller and derrickman shall ensure an effective two way communication system at all times.  The 

communication procedure should be discussed and agreed upon in the toolbox talks / Pre Job Safety 
Meeting.  

3.  Driller to ensure adequate manning on rig floor at all times.  
4.  The current JSA is to be revised to ensure it covers all potential hazards and control measures for 

monkey-board operations including this particular risk exposure.  

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
5.  A memo was issued to all drilling rigs not to assign any employee a job outside his job description unless 
deemed competent to do the task and it has been approved and documented by the Rig Superintendent.  

Issued standing instructions to all rig medical staff to initiate a “Medivac” for any “struck by” injury or 
suspected case of internal injury to head, chest or abdomen. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2010 

