Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT - FALLING SLEDGE HAMMER 

 

 
ALERT 08 – 25 
 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

While doing a pressure test on the stand pipe, a leak was detected at approximately 39 feet (12 meters) 
from the rig floor.  The Tool pusher assigned a crewman to go up and tighten the hammer union joint.  The 
area was cleared as per Standard Operating Procedures (SOP).  Once the adjustment was finished the 
worker began to come down out of the derrick.  At the same time as the worker was coming down, the rest 
of the crew began normal operations on the rig floor entering the cleared area.  At about 23 feet (7 meters) 
from the rig floor, the worker lost his grip on the 4 pounds (2kg), sledge hammer (which was covered with 
mud).  The hammer fell, striking a cross section brace, changing its direction and then striking a worker on 
the back section of his hard hat, producing a lesion and cracking his hard hat, producing a lesion.  

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  Worker did not use the tool carrier bag provided. 
•  Crew returned to the restricted area before the worker finished coming all the way down. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed supervisors to do the 
following: 
 

•  Discuss with the crew, the safe handling of hand tools prior to use. Inspect before use. 
•  Explain the importance of using the proper equipment such as tool bags and tool belts for tasks 

performed in high places. 

•  Go over with the crew, the steps in the JSA for this specific job. 
•  Follow operational safety procedures by utilizing safety inspections. 

Place Where  
Hammer Fell 

Hard hat Cracked by the impact of the hammer 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2008 

 

 

 

 

