Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 09 

 

HIGH PRESSURE RELEASE RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  maintenance  team,  consisting  of  three  crew  members,  had  been  involved  in  stripping  a  pulsation 
damper’s bottom plate, which had a damaged seal groove.  Prior to starting the task, the crew checked the 
pulsation  damper  gauge  for  pressure  and  verified  a  zero  pressure  reading.    After  unscrewing  all  flange 
mounting studs and Allen-screws from the bottom plate, the crew started to remove the bottom plate with the 
extractor  studs,  which  enabled  them  to  move  the  bottom  plate  slightly.    As  per  the  advice  of  the  crew 
supervisor and in order to remove the stuck bottom plate, it was decided to utilize the two inserts in the gap 
between the bottom plate and dampener body in combination with the extractor studs.  While two of the crew 
members  forced  the  bottom  plate  open  with  wedges  from  opposing  sides,  another  crew  member  (injured 
person), who was positioned in front of the bottom plate, was using the pneumatic spanner to screw-in the 
extractor studs.  Without warning, the diaphragm burst out due to the pressure inside, resulting in the bottom 
flange  being  discharged  from  the  pulsation  dampener.    The  bottom  plate  struck  the  injured  person  on  the 
thigh of his right leg, throwing him approximately 6 meters (20 feet) due to the differential pressure wave, and 
causing serious injury to his right leg. 
 

Position of IP after accident 

Pulsation Damper K-Series Diagram 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The gauge read zero psi as witnessed by three separate people before dismantling of the dampener began; 
however,  the  gauge  was  faulty  and  showed  an  inaccurate  reading.    Consequently,  the  crew  members 
involved  in  the  operation  did  not  anticipate  the  contained  pressure  and  failed  to  bleed  off  the  pressure  by 
opening the charging valve.  The pulsation damper had approximately 750 psi of pressure within, while the 
bottom plate was being removed. In addition, the contributing causes were: 

•  Pulsation damper gauge had an expired calibration. 
•  Pulsation  dampener  diaphragm  was  not  secured  to  the  diaphragm  stabilizer  with  the  diaphragm 
locking screw, which resulted in the diaphragm expanding like a balloon due to the system pressure, 
and piercing through the bottom flange hole, as the crew tried to remove the flange. 

•  The crew had no experience in removal of the pulsation damper’s bottom plate. 
•  There was no Permit-To-Work (PTW) issued, Job Safety Analysis (JSA) completed and Toolbox Talk 

(TBT) conducted prior to starting the task. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2013 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  The company communicated the relevant Safety Alert to all rigs and logistic base teams. 
•  All  maintenance  crews  were  reminded  that  the  system  pressure  must  be  bled  off  completely  by 
opening the charging valve.  Following this, the charging valve and gauge must be unscrewed from 
the pulsation damper.  Further, it is recommended to remove the top cover plate during disassembly 
of  the  pulsation  damper.    This  information  should  be  reflected  in  the  relevant  JSA  and  discussed 
during the TBT Meeting. 

•  Maintenance  Foremen  were  reminded  that  whenever  personnel  are  working  on  pressurized  lines 
and/or pressure vessels, regardless of the product contained, the pressure is to be vented before the 
work begins. 

•  The  company  placed  more  emphasis  on  its  implementation  of  the  gauges  calibration  program  and 

reminded all maintenance personnel to use only gauges with a valid calibration certificate. 

•  Pulsation  damper  plate  stabilizers  should  always  be  secured  to  the  diaphragm  with  the  stabilizer 

screw (ensure during replacement of diaphragm elastomer). 

•  All employees were reminded that all pressure vessel maintenance/services are to be performed by 

•  All  employees  were  reminded  that  a  PTW  is  mandatory  for  any  maintenance  task  performed  on  a 

competent mechanics only. 

compressed vessel. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2013 

