Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 32  
 

INATTENTIVENESS RESULTS IN INJURED EMPLOYEES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was laying down drill pipe with 42 joints left in the hole when they experienced a tight connection.  
The iron roughneck wasn’t breaking the connection as it should, so the crew began using manual tongs to 
break the pipe connection and spin the pipe out with the rotary table.  With both tongs on the joint of pipe, the 
driller engaged the breakout tong to break the connection.  The driller mistakenly thought the connection had 
broken  when  the  tongs  had  slipped  off  of  the  joint.    The  driller  engaged  the  rotary  table  which  caused  the 
breakout  tong  to  swing  all  the  way  around  striking  the  makeup  tong.    The  makeup  tong  then  struck  an 
employee, forcing him into the drawworks, resulting in an injury.  A second employee was injured when he 
fell  over  the  rotary  chain  guard  in  an  attempt  to  avoid  the  swinging  tongs.    A  third  employee  was  nearly 
struck in the head with the swinging tong; however, he bent over just in time for the tong to swing over the 
top of his head, knocking off his hard hat. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The dyes on the iron roughneck were worn out and would not break the connection. This led the crew to 

use the manual tongs. 

•  During the investigation it was found that the clevis, used to connect the snub-line to the break out tong, 
was  not  properly  equipped.    The  pin  used  in  the  clevis  was  missing  the  nut  and  the  keeper  that  was 
being  used  was  inadequate.    This  allowed  the  pin  to  be  pulled  from  the  clevis  during  the  high  torque 
situation.  

•  The driller mistakenly thought the connection had  broken and  activated the rotary  table to spin  out the 

joint of pipe. 

•  The manual tongs were not inspected prior to starting the job. 
•  Since the manual tongs are not used on a frequent basis, it is easy for the crew to be out of practice and 

the importance of safety, while using the manual tongs, was not emphasized. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All employees were reminded that a JSA should be created, reviewed and or updated for this particular 

task.  The JSA should include properly inspecting the tongs and any other tools required to do the job. 

•  All  personnel  were  instructed  to  conduct  a  pre-job  safety  meeting  anytime  the  task  deviates  from  the 

normal procedure. 

•  The rig manager reminded all personnel that during these operations the personnel involved should slow 

down and communicate with one another to ensure the job is done as safely as possible. 

•  The floor hands were instructed when using the manual tongs, that once the tongs have a good bite on 

the joint, they should clear the area until the connection is safely broken. 

•  The  crews  were  reminded  when  using  the  manual  tongs,  that  once  the  connection  is  broken  the  joint 

should be spun out using the iron roughneck, not by the rotary table. 

•  The crews were instructed to take the time necessary to replace the worn out dyes of the iron roughneck 
and finish the job accordingly.  In this case, the rig manager had an extra set of dyes in his possession.  
Had  the  crew  taken  the time to replace the  worn out dyes  and continue  using  the  iron roughneck, this 
incident would have been preventable.  The use of the manual tongs should have been a last resort. 

•  All  rigs  in  the  fleet  were  instructed  to  conduct  an  immediate  inspection  of  their  manual  tongs  and 
document that they are equipped with the proper safety accessories.  The safety department will verify 
this inspection and will assist each rig to comply with this requirement. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2012 

