Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 28 
 

FALL FROM EQUIPMENT ONTO A TRAILER RESULTS IN A LACERATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
Once loaded  onto  a trailer  for transport to a new  location, the “toe” extension on the Driller side substructure base  was 
removed due to it extending too far off the trailer because the driver was concerned about maneuvering the load to the 
new location. With the extension secured, two employees climbed up inside of the substructure to remove the pins. After 
the extension was removed, the employees then climbed down. While descending, one employee slipped off of a tool box, 
which was fabricated into the substructure.  He fell approximately 5 feet (1.5m) to the ground and landed on his right side. 
Shortly thereafter, he noticed a laceration in his arm pit that required sutures to close. It appears that the employee may 
have struck a keeper pin as he fell from the substructure. 
 

 

 

The  IE  (injured  employee)  was  attempting  to 
step down from the tool box to the I-beam. He 
lost his footing on the I-beam. 

The  height  of  the  tool  box  where  the  IE  (injured  employee) 
was  standing  from  the  substructure  on  the  trailer  was 
approximately 5 feet (1.5m). 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  The employee did not remain tied off as he descended the substructure and trailer. 
•  The “toe” extension had not been removed prior to it being loaded onto the trailer, and it was removed only after the 

driver expressed concern.   
JSA was not performed once a decision was made to remove the “toe” extension. 

• 
•  A work basket was available, but it was not used to remove the pins. 
•  The Rig Manager (who was at the trailer and provided instruction) did not take a leadership role (he did not make sure 

that the above safety actions were implemented). 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  Employees  were  reminded  of  the  tie-off  requirements  when  working  at  heights,  which  includes  the  determination  of 

means for maintaining the tie offs when ascending and descending equipment.  

•  The Rig Manager  was reminded to coordinate  with the Truck Pusher and Truck Driver  to determine if an extension 

should be removed prior to a load out (i.e., utilize a measuring tape to determine overall length).   

•  All  crew  members  were  reminded  that  a  documented  JSA  must  be  performed  for  any  critical,  abnormal,  or  major 

change in an operation. 

•  Utilize the right tool for the job; the work basket should have been utilized to remove the pins. 
•  The  Rig  Manager  was  reminded  that  he  must  ensure  that  company  expectations  (JSA,  SWA,  tool  /  equipment 
selection, working at height) are discussed and implemented, especially for any critical, abnormal, or major change in 
an operation. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect 

the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

their own situations and practices 

Issued October 2014 

