Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 03  
 

 

VESSEL TO VESSEL TRANSFER HOSE WHIPLASH RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A vessel was instructed to supply base oil to a drillship working offshore.  While completing the connection 
on the vessel’s manifold, the transfer hose was suddenly tensioned and snatched off the vessel’s manifold.  
The  hose  whiplashed  around  and  struck  an  Able-Bodied  Seaman  (AB),  which  knocked  him  overboard.  
General alarms on both vessels were raised.  The AB was recovered by the drillship’s rescue boat and was 
noted  to  have  been  suffering  from  multiple  injuries.    The  injured  AB  was  evacuated,  by  helicopter,  to  the 
nearest hospital where he passed away. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The hose had twisted around the portside propeller while connecting. 
•  One part of the hose (vessel side) was not fitted with floating collars. 
•  Due to excessive tension, the hose and the connections adaptors parted. 
•  No hose monitoring was being conducted from the rig at the time of the accident. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Reminded all vessels in the fleet that a transfer hose with floating devices their full length or self

floating 

• 

hose are preferred during transfer operations. 
Instructed  all  vessel  masters  that  if  the  hose  is  not  fully  fitted  with  floating  devices,  that  they  should 
ensure  that  the  portion  without  floating  devices  is  secured  on  deck  (if  possible)  or  a  strict  minimum  of 
length is allowed in the water. 

‐

•  Ensure  that  the  direction  of  the  hose  is  always  checked  /monitored  from  connection  to  disconnection 

from both units. 

•  All  crew  members  were  reminded  to  review  the  JSAs  regarding  the  risk  of  the  hose  being  trapped 

underneath the vessel hull or twisted around the propeller. 

• 

•  Crew members were also reminded to review the JSA to ensure that a check of the physical condition of 
the transfer hose has been completed and to ensure that the last 33 feet (10m) end of the hose (vessel 
side) is fitted with floating devices. 
In  addition  to  the  two  AB’s  on  deck  carrying  out  the  connections  and  transfer  operations,  the  vessel 
master was instructed that he/she must appoint a crewmember as a supervisor. The supervisor will be in 
charge  of  connection  and  disconnection  of  the  transfer  hose(s)  and  is  not  involved  in  the  transfer 
operations.  The supervisor will also be given a portable two-way radio in order to maintain contact with 
the bridge. 
Instructed  all  vessel  masters  that  other  operations  should  not  be  undertaken  that  could  distract  crew 
members from the bulk fuel transfer operation.  Once the transfer has commenced, the transfer should 
not be  interrupted. If the interruption is absolutely required, the transfer must be secured and the  hose 
must be disconnected. 

• 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2013 

