Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 09 

IMPROPERLY MOUNTED RIG FLOOR WINCH 

RESULTS IN HI-POTENTIAL NEAR HIT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During operations on the drill floor the crew was in the process of picking up riser through the V-door.  They 
were using the 4500 kg winch for pulling back the riser to permit racking of the riser into the V-door.  As the 
riser was being picked up, the winch bolts holding the winch to the pedestal failed and the winch broke free 
from its pedestal.  When the winch broke free from its mount and was suspended by its wire rope, it swung 
sideways and smashed the glass on the doghouse door.  The riser then slid back down the V-door and came 
to rest on the V-door stopper. 

 

 

 

 

 

Winch suspended by  

wire rope 

Winch base plate showing 

incorrect bolt pattern 

Winch swinging toward  

doghouse door 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The  original  winch  base  did  not  have  the  same  design  or  bolt  pattern  as  the  base  holding  plate  and 

required modification before use (holes were misaligned). 

  Failure to recognize situation as requiring Management of Change (MOC) controls. 
  Undersized bolts used to secure the winch to its base failed under load. 
  There was no follow-up inspection record of the modification or load testing performed. 
  Wrong team members were involved in the installation 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the 
following: 
 
  Check all lifting equipment before use for damage or potential mechanical failure. 
  Follow Management Of Change (MOC) process to plan the scope of work and who needs to be involved 

at each phase. 

  Renewal  and  modifications  to  equipment  are  to  be  checked  by  OIM,  Maintenance  Supervisor  and 
QHSET Officer at a minimum (Tourpusher to be included for Drilling equipment and Barge Engineer for 
Marine equipment). 

  Any load bearing equipment should be load tested to SWL before use. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2011 

