Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 35 
 

DRILL LINE SPOOL RUNAWAY  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Drill Crew was in the process of slipping and cutting 1-3/8” drill line.  Two Floormen were assigned to un-
spool  wire  rope  until  there  was  approximately  a  40  ft.  loop  below  the  storage  reel.    The  rig  arrangement 
necessitates  this  to  facilitate  slipping  the  drill  line  through  the  deadline  anchor.    As  the  drill  line  reached  the 
desired slack, the spool continued to rotate due to its momentum.  An attempt was made to stop the rotation of 
the spool using a wooden board as a break lever.  When it became evident it was not possible to stop the spool 
from rotating, all personnel were instructed to vacate the area and stay clear.  The drill line eventually became 
entangled,  which  stopped  the  rotation  of  the  spool.  Several  thousand  feet  of  drill  line  un-spooled  from  the 
storage reel.  Fortunately there were no injuries associated with this incident.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The practice is to manually un-spool drill line from the spool prior to slipping the drill line.  
2.  The drill line spool is not driven by a powered device.  
3.  The drill line spool is not equipped with a mechanical braking device.  
4.  A relatively full spool of drill line was in use and the momentum of the rotating spool was too great to be 

stopped manually. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  A company standard drill line spool drive system was developed.  
 
Issued Action Items  
1.  Domestic Operations in conjunction with Technical Services will develop a company standard drill line spool 

2.  All rigs shall ensure appropriate safeguards are currently in place to prevent a similar incident, including but 

drive and braking system.  

not limited to:  

•  Review and revision of the JSA for the task of slipping and cutting drill line.  
•  Ensuring the drill line spool is equipped with a mechanical braking device(s).  
•  Confirm the mechanical braking device is maintained and fit for purpose. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2004 

