Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 10 

DAMAGED ELECTRIC CORD RESULTS  

IN WELDER ELECTROCUTION 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED  
 
Two contract welders were working side by side in the hole of the bilge pump room in the column of a semi 
submersible.  Welder 1 (Injured Person [IP]) finished his side of the job and welder 2 asked welder 1 to pass 
the welding lead so welder 2 could weld.  Welder 2 got no response from welder 1 and noticed that welder 1 
was in contact with the floodlight being used for additional lighting.  Welder 2 thought welder 1 might have 
received an electric shock so welder 2 climbed out of the bilge and disconnected the floodlight and welding 
cable.  Welder 2 immediately called for help.  Response team arrived but was unable to revive the IP.   
Background Note:  A Permit To Work (PTW) and a Job Safety Analysis (JSA) were completed for the task.  
The 220 V floodlight was taken to the work location, but was deemed improper for the job and was moved to 
the side with the cord wrapped around it, but it was not removed from the work area.  At some point in time, 
the floodlight was put in the bilge hole.   
 

Fig. 1. 220 Volt floodlight with cord that had been pinched between the lamp fixture and the 
mounting bracket while it was being positioned by welder 1 for the job.   

Pinch point on light.  

Wire pinched 
between fixture 
and bracket. 

 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  During the investigation it was discovered that the power cord was pinched and partially cut between the 

 

 

light fixture and the bracket.  (See Figure 1 above.)   

2.  Based on the observation of Welder 2 that Welder 1 was leaning against the floodlight, it was concluded 

that Welder 1 made contact with the exposed wires and / or the fixture’s metal frame. 

3.  The deceased contacted electrical current from the 220 V power cord of the floodlight.  
4.  The floodlight was designed for a fixed installation and not suitable for use as a portable light.   
5.  The rig has a floating 220 V system (“delta based” - 2 conductors and no common “ground” system); if 
only one conductor is cut, the other conductor remains “hot” and will not trip the10 amp breaker.  More 
guidance will be published by Asset Manager and Engineering on Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters and 
related electrical safety issues.  

6.  The  heat  index  (temp  +  humidity)  at  the  time  of  incident  is  estimated  at  97  deg  F.    There  was  no 

mechanized ventilation (air movement) in the confined / constrained area.   

7.  The coveralls worn by the IP were wet from perspiration. 
8.  Safety  Systems  failed  to  recognize  the  potential  hazard  electrical  shock  from  the  portable  light  being 
used.  The PTW system was used but did not capture all elements (confined space; electrical hazard; 
ventilation; communications and rescue team alert; etc).  A JSA was conducted with welding crew and 
supervisor, but was not specific to the job.  

 
  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
9.  Personnel (including the supervisor) were aware of the potential hazard of the floodlight and although it 
was put aside with cord wrapped around it, the light was not removed from the work area or rendered 
inoperative.  Although both welders were short-service contractors (less than 3 hitches on the rig), they 
were  not  accompanied  by  a  supervisor  /  mentor  because  the  welders  were  considered  highly 
experienced and qualified.      

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1. 

Instructed  rig  personnel  to  conduct  “Hazard  Hunt”  of  entire  rig  fleet  with  emphasis  on  portable  lights  / 
electric cords / power tools.  Ensure all portable electric equipment is registered and inspected, looking 
at the entire “system”, not only the electrical parts.  Chief Electrician to schedule periodic Hazard Hunt of 
portable electric equipment, using other Heads-Of-the Departments (HOD) to assist    

2.  All rig supervisors were instructed to attend JSA / PTW / Safety Leadership training sessions.  
3.  Rig supervisors are to enforce increased participation in STOP  (TM) method by mandating 1 STOP card 
per day per person on board (company and sub contractors; client and other client contractor personnel). 

4.  Procure low-voltage / pneumatic lights for portable requirements. 
5. 
6.  Ensure that all Permit to Work and Job Safety Analysis documents and reviews include inspection and 

Investigate use of Ground Fault Interrupter (GFI) devices to work with portable electric equipment. 

assessment of all possible electrical hazards prior to the job.  

7.  Before work begins, make a final worksite check to ensure all safety provisions / systems are in place 

with all hazards controlled and risks are reduced to ALARP—as low as reasonably possible.  

8.  Use only low voltage lighting—especially in confined spaces.  
9.  All tools (Company’s, contractors and third party) are to be inspected and tested prior to use. 
10.  Instructed operations personnel that all the  below lights have metallic cases or enclosures and 

are prohibited as Portable Lighting   

  

  

Permanent fixed light not to be used as portable.  
 

 

 

  
 

 

  

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
12. Use only Portable Lighting as prescribed by Asset Manager and Engineering.   
 

ACCEPTABLE PORTABLE LIGHTING 

All have plastic enclosure (except air-powered unit) 

 
 
Air Powered – 24 Volt. 

Battery Powered 

   

    

Double insulated in-line transformer. 

 

 

 
1.  Primary Preferred Method: Air-driven 
2.  Secondary Preferred Method:  Battery-operated 
3.  Approved (NOT preferred):  Low-voltage (50 Volt AC and below) with in-line transformer 
4.  LAST RESORT (must be approved by Rig Manager / Electrical Supervisor prior to use):  High-

voltage (above 50Vac) must be rated for portable service as well as double insulated 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2009 

