Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 10  

 

HOT WORK OPERATIONS RESULTS IN DROPPED OBJECT 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
A  third  party  construction  company  was  carrying  out  the  removal  of  various  sections  of  grating  from  the 
derrick crown platform.  The area had been prepared for the removal by setting up a pulley system and the 
grating  was  lashed  through  the  perforations  using  retaining  wire  (the  same  type  as  would  be  used  to  lash 
scaffolding boards on to scaffolding).  After the preparation work had been carried out the section of grating 
was cut free in order to lower it to the drill floor.  At this point a section of grating measuring 70 x 37cm (2 ft x 
1 ft) and weighing 5.7Kg (13lbs) broke free and fell a distance of 52m (171ft) to the drill floor.  The grating 
struck a section of the accommodation, fragmented into  three sections and then all sections landed on the 
port side box girder of the rig. 
 

The 3 sections of grating measured 70 cm x 37cm 

Retaining wire used to secure the grating. Arrow 

(2ft x 1ft) and weighed in total 5.7Kg (13lbs). 

shows points of failure. 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  During  oxy/acetylene  cutting  of  the  grating,  burning  slag  had  made  contact  with  the  retention  wire 

causing damage which had gone unnoticed. 

•  When  the  grating  was  cut  free  from  the  derrick  structure  the  weight  of  the  grating  bearing  on  the 

damaged wire caused the retention wire to fail at the damaged point. 

•  The drop zone was insufficient. 
•  Personnel were present in the landing zone. 
•  There was only single point retention fitted to the grating. 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  The  company  reviewed  their  method  of  securing  the  grating  to  include  a  primary  and  secondary 

attachment.  The secondary attachment should be a minimum of a certified 1 ton wire rope sling. 

•  The company’s risk assessment procedure was reviewed to include controls to prevent damage to any 

lifting equipment which was to be used. 

•  All  employees  are  required  to  inspect  all  lifting  equipment  and  accessories  prior  to  and  after  every 

•  All  employees  were  reminded,  during  JSA  review,  to  take measures  to  ensure  no  personnel  enter  into 

operation. 

the drop zone. 

•  The company initiated a stand down and held a Toolbox Talk to inform all personnel of the ongoing work.  
Additionally,  measures  were  implemented  to  restrict  personnel  from  all  outside  areas  during  critical 
operations. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2013 

