Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 14 
 

FAILURE TO FOLLOW LOCKOUT PROCEDURE 

RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Work requiring disconnection and removal commenced on a mud mixing pump assembly without completing a 
Permit  to  Work,  Lock/Tag/Try  or  reviewing  the  JSA.    During  the  work  scope,  a  Motorman  passing  by  was 
asked to operate the chain fall assembly by pulling the control chain to raise the motor.  While pulling on this 
chain, it is thought that the loose fall of the operating chain contacted the on/off switch for the electric pump.  
This switch was about three foot above the motor and in direct line of the chain fall assembly.  (See attached 
photos)  This energized the 100 horsepower motor and caused it to go out of control.  It swung outward then 
upward, striking the motorman who was seriously injured and received a fracture of the upper arm and severe 
bruising to the side of his body, neck and face. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  No pre-job planning  
•  No Permit to Work  
•  No Lock out Tag out and Try  
•  No Job Safety Analysis 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Refresher training for Permit To Work, Lockout/Tagout/Try and JSA.  
•  Revise the JSA for this job to increase detail to eliminate these hazards and include Lockout procedures.  
•  Recommend purpose built lifting frame to eliminate chain falls from piping.  
• 
•  Recommend the electric switch be evaluated for a different type switch that is guarded on the start button. 

Install safety signs on all equipment that can be remotely operated or that starts automatically.  

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued March 2004 

