Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 26  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

FAILURE OF LIFTING EYEBOLT RESULTS IN DROPPED OBJECT 

The deck crew was attempting to move an electric motor weighing approximately 200kg (440 pounds) from 
the  shelter  deck  into  a  sea  container.    The  motor  was  lifted  using  a  crane.    The  banks-man  signaled  the 
crane operator to pick up the motor and lift it to the container, which was 5 meters (16 feet) away.  The motor 
was  lifted  and  moved  to  a  height  of  approximately  2.5  meters  (8  feet).    When  the  motor  approached  the 
container at a height of about 60cm (2 feet), two roustabouts entered the container to position the motor from 
inside  using  taglines.    As  the  motor  was  being  pulled  into  the  sea  container  it  tapped  the  wall  of  the 
container.  The motor casing parted at the eyebolt anchor mount allowing the motor to fall to the floor.  The 
crane operator stopped the job and informed the Supervisor.  No personnel were injured. 
 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

•  Failure of the lifting eye. 
•  The  motor  had  been  in  storage  for  a  period  of  approximately  5  years.    It  was  identified  during  the 
investigation the lifting eye had previously parted and had been welded to the frame of the motor at an 
earlier time by persons unknown.  The implications of this were not realized by the crew and they thought 
that they could safely complete the task.  The eyebolt had not been included in the lifting gear inspection 
routine. 

•  The motor had been painted and the lifting eye looked to be in good condition. 
•  Lack  of  knowledge  by  the  deck  crew  to  identify  the  hazards  associated  with  previous  failures  of  lifting 

eyes, and the fact they should never be welded. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  Rig crews were instructed to remove all lifting eyes from motors in storage and on location and 

• 

replace the eyelet with a suitable bolt that conforms to the thread pattern of the motor. 
If eye bolts are to be utilized, rig crews were instructed to include the lifting eye bolts on the lifting 
inspection registers and routine maintenance inspections. 

•  All crews were advised of the previous alerts on lifting eye failures and inspection requirements. 
•  All personnel were reminded that lifting eyes are to be utilized for final positioning only.  Electric 

motors are to be placed inside a designated basket for movement around the rig or they are to be 
slung by deck crew. 

•  Rig crews were reminded that lifting eyebolts are designed for final positioning on mounting 

brackets/foundation only and should not be utilized for overhead lifting and transport. 

Note:  Reference IADC Safety Alerts 09-02 and 03-19 for additional information. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2013 

 

 

 

 

 

