Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 49 
 

DROPPED 18 5/8" CASING NEAR MISS INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A rig recently had a near miss incident during the casing running operation.  While pulling a joint of 18 5/8" 
casing up to the V-door the pickup line slipped over the collar and off the joint allowing it to fall across the rig 
floor, coming to rest against the derrick.  While no one was injured in this incident, it clearly had the potential 
to cause serious injury or fatality. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. The Service Representative preferred to use a pickup line over single joint elevators.  He felt that it was 

just as safe, and would be easier for the rig floorhands and stabber hands.  All parties failed to see the 
hazard of using a single wrap around casing with a beveled collar.   

2. The pickup line was 35 feet long and the elevator bales were 18 feet.  This meant that the pickup line was 

only long enough to wrap around the casing once. 

 

3. The Driller picked up the joint of casing 
from the V-door onto the rig floor.  At the 
top of the V-door the floor has an offset.  
The casing struck the offset, causing it to 
vibrate.  This may have contributed to the 
pickup line slipping off the casing. 

4. The beveled shoulder made it easier for 
the pickup line to slip over the collar as it 
was being moved. 

 

 
5. The JSA did not specify that the pickup line must be double-wrapped around the casing. 
6. The Service Representative from the casing company requested that the casing be single-wrapped, and   

Note the beveled collar shoulder. 

the Driller agreed. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1. Using casing pickup elevators is the preferred method of picking up casing.  The operation should always 

attempt to secure the appropriate elevators prior to running casing. 

2. If pickup elevators cannot be obtained, then a pickup line of the appropriate length may be used.  The line 

should be long enough to reach the casing in the V-door and allow for two wraps on it, and for the casing 
stabber to remove them easily.   

3. The pickup line must be inspected prior to use to ensure that it is certified for the weight of the pipe to be 

lifted and in good condition. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2004 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
4. Although there were no injuries in this incident, it is a good reminder that no one should ever turn their 

back on moving casing, and they should have a clear escape route available at all times.  This should be 
covered in the JSA. 

5. The OIM should conduct the JSA with all parties involved to ensure that everyone involved is aware of the 

dangers and correct procedures associated with the job.  "Never take anything for granted." 

6. Although the Service Representatives handle most of the job, responsibility for safety remains with the rig 

supervisors.   

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2004 

