Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 13 
 

UNGUARDED ENGINE FAN RESULTS IN AN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  attempting  to  check  the  water  level  in  the  generator,  the  mechanic  had  stepped  up  on  the  engine 
mount and placed his hand through a gap in the radiator fan guard to lever him up and gain access to the 
radiator cap. As the generator was running at this time, he suffered cuts and abrasions to four fingers when 
the fan blade made contact with his hand 
 

 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Two  protective  guard  bars  on  the  generator  fan  had  been  previously  removed  for  cleaning 

purposes, leaving a gap large enough to place the hand in harms way. 

2.  No climbing device was available for the employee to gain access to the radiator cap. 
3.  The hazard caused by the unauthorized alteration of the fan guard had not been noticed during rig 

safety inspections or by the mechanic 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  opening  in  the  fan  guard  was  immediately  fixed  and  all  other  generator  fans  were  checked  for  a 

similar safety problem 

•  A ladder was specially built and installed to allow workers safe access to the radiator cap 
•  Training was given to ensure rig safety audits and the hazard identification process is effective and that 

•  Safety guards are provided for a reason.  These guards must not be altered in any way without approval 

effort is made to safeguard equipment 

from Houston HSE department. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2005 

