Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 03 

LAYING DOWN JOINT OF CASING 

RESULTS IN A FALL 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After  running  casing,  a  floor  plate  was  removed  from  the  rig  floor  to  access  the  cellar.    A  20  foot  piece  of 
casing was cut off and hoisted with the rig floor air winch.  Two rig floor workers were attempted to push the 
20  foot  piece  of  16”  out  the  V-door.    The  load  was too  heavy  for  the  two  workers  to  handle  and  it  started 
swinging back towards the rotary table.  As the load came back, one of the workers fell through the opening 
in  the  rig  floor.    The  worker  fell  approximately  22  feet  and  suffered  a  fracture  at  the  base  of  his  skull,  a 
fractured right thigh and multiple bruising. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The supervisor (driller) did not realize that the casing would be too heavy for only two rig floor workers to 

2.  No lay-down equipment was used.  
3.  The  air  hoist  operator  did  not  let  the  load  down  when  it  became  apparent  that  the  load  was  moving 

handle.   

backwards.   

4.  The hazard of working around an open hole was not identified in the pre-job safety meeting.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Recommendations are as follows: 

Prior to conducting a new task, (i.e. example laying down cut off casing), a pre-job assessment of the task 
must be done and the supervisor must conduct a review of the work area.  The pre-job assessment should 
identify all the risks involved and the proper equipment needed to conduct the job safely. 

Steps recommended to be taken next time casing is to be laid down:  

  Close all floor plate openings 
  Rig up lay-down equipment 
  Ensure all unnecessary equipment is removed from work areas 
  Ensure adequate personnel are present  to complete the task 
  Ensure all personnel understand the task to be completed. 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2011 

