Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 28 
 

TONG INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  floor  crew  was  making  up  drill  pipe  prior  to  running  into  the  hole  to  land  the  PBR  on  the  tubing 
string.  The rotary brake was used to hold the pipe in the rotary from turning.  The Lead Floorman (Injured 
Person - IP) was operating a backup manual pipe tong while torquing a stand of drill pipe with the top drive 
system.  As the Driller began to see the spinner torque-up the drill pipe, he released the rotary brake, to 
transfer the torque to the backup manual pipe tong.  As the torque was transferred to the backup pipe tong 
it moved in a clockwise position and the IP became caught between the snub line and backup pipe tong 
lever.  The IP was evacuated from the rig and later died from the injuries.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The snub line was reportedly longer than normally installed due to a non-routine operation prior to the 

•  The breakout tong appeared to be tensioned by the snub line, when in fact it was the cathead breakout 

•  The cathead breakout line and snub line were both attached to the tong.   
•  The cathead breakout line was jammed at the cathead giving the appearance that the snub line was 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions to 
rig supervisors and rig personnel: 
 
•  The Rig Manager should review and confirm the current operating practices for torquing tubulars at the 

•  Review tong management on the drill floor.  Confirm correct operation of pipe tongs during routine and 

• 

non-routine operations.   
Include a review of safe positioning of people, supervision by Driller and Asst Driller, and the hazards 
associated with pipe tong operations.   

•  Length  of  snub  lines  and  angle  to  anchor  point  to  be  physically  verified  to  ensure  no  pinch  point 

hazards exist for a Floorman while operating manual pipe tongs. 

incident. 

line.   

tensioned.  

rotary table. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2003 

