Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 03 – 14 
 

FAILURE OF HIGH PRESSURE LINE RESULTS 

IN HIGH POTENTIAL SERIOUS INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  slick  line  lubricator  was  made  up  on  top  of  a  christmas  tree  with  a  nitrogen  line  made  up  to  a  side  entry 
pump-in  sub.    The  rig  chicksan  swivel  joints  and  straight  joints  were  rigged  up  from  the  christmas  tree  wing 
valve  to  the  choke  manifold.    The  christmas  tree  master  valve  was  closed.    The  job  task  was  to  test  the 
lubricator  and  lines  through  to  the  choke  with  nitrogen  to  6500  psi.    A  JSA  was  conducted  prior  to  the  job.  
Once the pressure was applied, a straight line between the christmas tree and choke parted about 1-inch past 
the weld on the wing-half end.  A safety chain was attached to all connections on all lines but the chain on the 
straight joint slid off due to a clean break.  All personnel were clear and no one was injured.  However, clearly 
this incident had a high potential for injury to personnel.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A visual inspection of the pipe showed a decrease in metal thickness in the area where it parted.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  All  chicksans  should  be  visually  inspected  prior  to  use.    Any  chicksan  that  has  an  appearance  of  being 

worn and suspect in any way, is to be removed from service and sent in for inspection.   

•  Rig  Supervisors  were  reminded  to  strictly  adhere  to  the  company’s  Maintenance  System  procedure  for 

Non-Destructive Testing inspection of chicksans on a 24-month interval.   

•  The  Engineering  Dept.  was  directed  to  review  the  inspection  procedure  and  frequency  to  determine  if 

changes need to be made. 

•  Ensure chicksans are secured before applying pressure and pumping through them. 
•  Review the JSA’s dealing with the pressuring of chicksan lines, and address the need for personnel to stay 
clear  of  the  lines  when  under  pressure  or  when  pumping  operations,  involving  high  pressure,  are  taking 
place.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued March 2003 

