Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 25 
 

GREASING CROWN ASSEMBLY – NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While greasing a deadline sheave, a Roustabout (who had never been to the crown before) placed his arm 
through the fast line sheave for stability.  At the same time the rig mechanic on the rig floor asked the Driller 
to  move  the  blocks  to  enable  him  to  grease  them.    The  Driller  forgot  the  Roustabout  was  working  in  the 
derrick until after he stopped the drum clutch immediately after starting it.  The grease gun was caught in the 
sheave, wrenching it from the hand of the Roustabout. The Roustabout suffered slight bruising to the forearm 
and the grease gun fell to the ground just missing a Company Representative.  THIS INCIDENT HAD HIGH 
POTENTIAL AND COULD HAVE RESULTED IN AN AMPUTATION OR A  SEVERE BLOW TO ANYONE 
WORKING ON THE FLOOR. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The Driller forgot that a Roustabout was working in the derrick and the Lockout / Tagout procedure 
of the drawworks was not followed.  Supervision became complacent. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed all rig supervisors and personnel that:   
 
?? The  Lockout  /  Tagout  procedure  is  to  be  followed  when  greasing  the  traveling  blocks,  crown,  or 

when work is being conducted in the derrick. 
Inexperienced workers need to be shown how to complete tasks. (JSAs) 

??
?? A  sign  displaying  “Danger – Workmen Above”  be displayed on the rig floor when maintenance or 

other operations are being conducted in the derrick. 

?? Dropped  Object  safe  practices  shall  be  adopted  and  used  for  all  work  equipment  which  is  being 
used at a height above 6 feet.  All tools must be secured to the worker or tool basket.  The area 
below the worker must also be barricaded off. 
Improved  communication  among  team  members  to  ensure  all  employees  are  aware  of  the 
whereabouts of other team members at all times. 

??

?? A  JSA  is  required  for  greasing  the  block  and  lines  &  all  other  activities  involving  2  or  more 

employees and 3 or more sequential steps. 

?? A Safety Meeting to be held prior to commencement of work to identify the hazards associated with 

greasing the crown block.  
Improved Supervision to observe and identify potential hazards before they occur.   

??

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2002 

