Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 30  
 

ACCIDENTAL TRIGGERING OF POWER WASHER  

RESULTS IN FOOT INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured person sustained a severe injury to his foot with the power washer while cleaning out the mud 
pit.  The injured person was cleaning the mud pit and was using the power washer and super sucker to cut a 
path to the jet barrel.  The sludge under the injured person’s feet gave way and the injured person lost his 
balance.    In  an  attempt  to  catch  himself,  the  injured  person  tried  to  use  the wand  as  a cane.    The  injured 
person inadvertently placed the tip of the wand on top of his foot and while falling pulled the trigger spraying 
water  set  at  1500  psi  through  his  boot  and  also  through  his  foot.    The  foot  was  severely  injured  and  the 
injured person was admitted to the hospital for observation and scheduled for surgery to remove the debris 
from his foot.  The injured person could lose his foot if the infection doesn’t improve. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The sludge gave way causing the injured person to fall.   
  The tip of the wand was accidentally placed on top of the foot. 
  The injured person pulled the trigger of the power washer while falling. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the 
following: 
 
  Be aware of your surroundings. 
  Take extra precaution when working with any tool that may be under pressure. 
  Using a power washer with a longer wand would make it harder for the individual to contact himself or 

accidentally spray towards the body. 

  Power washers used at such pressure are very dangerous and can cause severe injury to body parts.  
(Note:  You  should  never  use  a  power  washer  to  clean  your  boots  or  any  other  clothing  while  on  your 
body.  No Exception!!) 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2011 

