Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 16  
 

MODIFIED EQUIPMENT--BATTERY LEADS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
This bulletin is taken from a rig’s HAZARD IDENTIFICATION (HAZID) and is not the result of a near miss 
report or injury incident.  This report is a good example of the HAZID system being utilized by employees.  
Recently an employee observed a potentially dangerous, modified piece of equipment being used to refuel 
vehicles.  An extension cord was being used as a jumper from a 12-volt battery to a 12-volt DC fuel pump at 
the fueling station.   
 
The extension consisted of a set of battery jumpers with a 125V plug on the other end that connected to a 
battery and plugged into a 125V compatible plug at the fuel pump.  Two "What Ifs" come to mind:   
What if someone plugs an 110V extension cord into the female plug at the pump to power the 12V pump? 
What if someone plugs the adapter into a 120V receptacle thinking the jumper is designed to charge a 
battery? 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Personnel who created the adapter did not follow company management of change procedures.  They also 
did not recognize the potential hazard that was created.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The solution to eliminate the hazard was to install a transformer 120VAC to 12VDC and a switch to the fuel 
pump.  The equipment modification was discussed with the people involved and they were encouraged to 
continue to look for ways to improve processes and share their ideas.  However, we need to be ever-vigilant 
identifying hazards, and modifying equipment must be approved by the division office and the company 
Engineering and HSE departments when appropriate.  Refer to the company’s HSE Manual for further 
information on equipment modification.   
 

 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2005 

