Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 13 – 05  
 
 

DRILL PIPE DISLODGED FROM PIPE BIN DURING DRIFTING OPERATIONS 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  using  a  drift  mandrel  to  determine  the  inside  diameter  of  the  drill  pipe  and  check  for  obstructions 
(rabbiting), a joint of drill pipe was knocked out of a vertical storage bin.  To assist in the drifting operations, 
an  employee  was  suspended  in  a  man-cage  above  the  pipe  racks.    The  top  of  the  joint  of  pipe  came  in 
contact  with  the  cage-suspended  employee’s  foot.    The  contact  dislodged  the  pipe  from  the  vertical  pipe 
storage  bin  and  it  fell  outward  towards  the  cab  of  the  crane  below  where  it  entered  the  front  of  the 
windscreen and landed between the legs of the crane operator.  The crane operator was unable to exit the 
crane cab prior to impact and sustained slight abrasions to his left calf. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  contributing  factors  identified  during  the  investigation  of  the  drill  pipe  dislodging  from  the  pipe  bin 
included: 

•  The possibility of drill pipe dislodging from the pipe bins was not identified. 
•  The possibility of contact between the man-cage and the drill pipe was not identified. 
•  Consequently, the drill pipe was not physically restrained and was not prevented from dislodging. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
To address this incident the company did the following: 
• 
• 
•  Refresher training was conducted for crews on JSA and hazard identification. 
 

Instructed personnel that locking devices are to be used on the pipe bins. 
Installed physical barriers around the pipe racking system. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2013 

