Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 20  
 

HAND TOOL LEFT ON CCU RESULTS IN POTENTIAL DROPPED OBJECT 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
When  receiving  baskets  and  containers  from  the  vessel,  the  flagman  on  the  platform  observed  a 
sledgehammer lying loose on top of a cargo carrying unit (CCU).  The weight of the sledgehammer is 2.24 kg 
(~5 lbs).  The possible drop height from the basket to the sea/vessel was estimated to be 60 meters (~197 
feet), Impact=1318 J.  The landing area on the platform was secured from entry during the cargo operation.  
The  Master  of  the  vessel  received  confirmation  from  the  crew  of  the  vessel  that  they  were  missing  one 
sledgehammer.  The last time the sledgehammer had been used was during preparations for loading  water 
based  mud  at  the  quay  (dock)  when  the  vessel  was  in  port  and  the  bulk  hose  was  connected-up  by  the 
vessel  crew.    During  that  operation,  an  object  was  discovered  in  the  hose  by  the  crew,  who  informed  the 
bridge.  The bridge then requested base personnel come onboard to clear the hose. The operator from the 
base had borrowed a sledge hammer from one of the vessel’s crew and removed the object from the hose. 
After the cargo hose had been connected, the sledgehammer was inadvertently placed onto the CCU.  The 
deck  crew  then  connected  the  hose  and  opened  the  loading  valve  on  orders  from  the  bridge.  One  crew 
member was appointed as hose guard ensuring that there were no leaks or deviations in the operation.  The 
sledgehammer  had  not  been  noticed  by  the  vessel  crew  before  the  CCU  was  sent  up  to  the  platform 
offshore.  
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  This  potential  dropped  object  was  the  result  of  a  slight  change  in  the  normal  operating  circumstances 

•  Base operator placed a sledgehammer on the top of a CCU instead of delivering it back to the vessel’s 

(object stuck in hose). 

crew after use. 

•  Vessel crew did not observe the sledgehammer before CCU was sent to platform. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  Perform a safety meeting on-board discussing the incident. 
•  Focus on routines for checking of cargo for loose objects. Clear responsibilities for checks between deck 

 

crew and bridge crew. 

•  Ensure check of loose objects is part of the toolbox talks before start of loading/discharging operations. 
•  Ensure Ship specific risk assessment is covering the check of cargo for loose objects. 
 
Credit to: Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 14-30 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2014 

