Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 34  
 

FATALITY OCCURS DURING OFFLINE CEMENTING OPERATIONS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The operation at the time of the incident was rigging down the cementing head and bonnet.  It is believed 
that the crew started rigging down the ancillary parts of the cement head (hoses and a “T” piece) some hours 
before the final rig down job commenced.  As part of  this preparatory work the lower valve on the cement 
head was closed to prevent fluid leaking onto the deck after the return line was drained.  This valve remained 
closed until the time of the incident.  During the time between the closure of the valve and the removal of the 
cement bonnet, pressure continued to build up in the system due to the effects of thermal expansion from the 
cement job.  The calculated pressure build up within the system was more than 140 psi.  Later the Well Head 
Engineer (WHE) went to the dog house with the JSA (Job Safety Analysis) for the ‘Installation of the Xmas 
Tree’  (which  followed  the  rigging  down  of  cement  head  activity).    The  WHE  discussed  the  JSA  with  the 
Tourpusher, who told the WHE to wait until the cementing supervisor arrived, so that all parties were present 
and the JSA could be conducted for all elements of the task, beginning with rigging the down of the cement 
head. 

 
While  waiting  for  the  cementing  supervisor,  the  WHE  met  with  the  Assistant  Driller  (AD),  who  was  the 
supervisor  responsible  for  assisting  both  Service  Companies  with  the  manpower  and  lifting  capabilities  for 
rigging down the cement head / bonnet and installation of Xmas tree.  They went through the WHE’s JSA 
and  then  proceeded  to  the  production  deck  and  the  well  head  in  question.    Prior  to  the  arrival  of  the 
cementing supervisor and prior to conducting the pre-job meeting, the locking nuts from the cement bonnet 
were all released.  There was no check and the personnel did not recognize that it was under pressure.  As 
the  last  locking  nut  was  loosened,  the  bonnet  and  cement  head  released  from  the  well  (pushed  upwards) 
and  toppled  towards  the  AD,  pinning  him  between  the  annulus  valve  on  an  adjacent  well  and  the  cement 
head.  The AD was severely injured and passed away shortly after. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The JSA was not conducted with all participants in the task. 
  The valve was not opened to ensure there was no pressure on the cementing head. 
  Pressure build up was not checked prior to removing the locking bolts.   
  The WHE began the task after being told to wait until the cementing supervisor was on site.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  No work shall start before all involved personnel are present and the pre-job is undertaken (incorporating 

JSA / TBRA (Task Based Risk Assessment) and detailed job instruction). 

  Complex tasks that involve multiple parties need to be properly planned and systematically undertaken 

  No  critical  task  process  shall  be  modified  without  the  Management  of  Change  process  being  followed 

  Assume that equipment with a capacity to be under pressure or energized is in that state until you can 

through the use of detailed work procedures.   

and communicated to all affected personnel. 

prove otherwise. 

  Compliance with and effective use of the Pre-Job Meeting methodology and use of the 4-Point Check / 

JSA / TBRA process is the duty of every individual and a condition of employment. 
JSA’s are not a substitute for Detailed Instruction Guides; they are a supplement to the guides. 

 
  Every Critical Task requires a Detailed Instruction procedure. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2010 

