Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 06 

 

 

 

 

 

REPAIR WORK RESULTS IN EYE INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A hydraulic hose failed on an Iron Roughneck assembly.  In order for the Maintenance team to identify the location of the 
failure, the hydraulics was reinstated and the PHM Iron Roughneck functioned.  The person who was subsequently injured 
was standing approx 12 feet away and was in the process of removing a compactor bag of protectors from the Drill Floor 
when a jet of hydraulic oil struck him.  The injured person was wearing safety glasses at the time however some hydraulic 
oil  found  it’s  way  into  his  left  eye.    The  injured  person’s  eye  was  flushed  with  eyewash  both  on  the  rig  floor  and  at  the 
Medic’s  office.    He  was  then  transported  to  an  eye  clinic  for  further  assessment  where  it  was  found  that  he  was  unfit  to 
return to work.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 

•  During the initial hose failure the fluid was contained within the PHM Iron Roughneck assembly.  There was a failure to 
recognize that by moving the PHM clear of well center and reinstating the hydraulics it was possible to open up a leak 
path for the oil clear of the assembly. 

•  Risk  Assessment  and  its  associated  hazards  were  not  considered  as  part  of  the  operation.    As  a  result  no  barriers 

were erected and simultaneous operations were allowed to take place on the drill floor. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

• 

Instructed  rig  personnel  to  prepare  a  detailed  procedure  for  hydraulic  hose  replacement  on  the  PHM.    Include  the 
need for a suitable and sufficient risk assessment. 

•  Rig personnel need to recognize the need to assess the risk to other ongoing operations in your area.  A change of 

direction may result in the introduction of another Work party resulting in unplanned simultaneous operations. 

•  A ‘rubber skirt’ has been attached to both sides of the PHM Iron Roughneck to act as a guard against potential leak 

Instructed rig personnel that that anybody can STOP a task if they believe it to be unsafe or not progressing as per 
Tool Box Talk/company procedures. 

The  potential  for  the  oil  to  find  a  leak  path  was  not  considered  by  experienced  crewmembers  and  as  such 
simultaneous operations were permitted on the Rig Floor.  Making assumptions is very dangerous and normally only 
come to light with hindsight – at which point it’s too late. 

•  Although  a  Tool  Box  Talk  was  held  to  cover  the  repair  of  the  PHM  there  was  a  failure  to  recognize  that  other 
personnel, working in close proximity of the faultfinding, could have been impacted by the reinstating of the hydraulics 
and functioning the PHM.  

paths.  

• 

• 

Messages: 

Person  in  left  of  picture  positioned  beside  source  of  leak.  
Person  on  right  of  picture  is  assuming  position  of  injured 
person. 

Picture  showing  rubber  mats  attached  to  PHM  carriage,  to 
assist 
leaks  within  carriage 
assembly. 

in  containing  hydraulic 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2004 

