Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 06  

 

TANK CABLE STRIKE RESULTS IN INJURY TO EMPLOYEE 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
Two employees were assigned to lay down the standing 400bbl tanks.  The task involves attaching a winch line to the 
tank bridle and pulling the tank onto the bed of a truck.  The bed truck, with the tank attached, was then moved to the 
desired location and the tank was positioned and unloaded (laid down) to face the lease entrance so a truck tractor can 
then pick up the tank and haul it to a location to be cleaned.  In this incident, the driver of the truck placed his truck in 
reverse so as to position it in front of the tank while the swamper attached the truck winch to the tank bridle.  The tank 
bridle was visually inspected prior to being attached and did not appear to be faulty.  As the truck driver began to winch 
the  tank  onto  the  truck,  the  bottom of  the  tank  slipped  (kicked)  out,  the  tank  bridle broke,  and  the  winch line snapped 
back towards the rear of the truck cab.  The winch line tail chain punched through the rear window of the truck, striking 
the driver on the right side of his head and face.  The driver was taken to hospital for examination and x-rays and was 
released the same day. 

 

 

 

 

NOTE: In the pictures above, The window protection is down in the left picture as opposed to the correct position in the 

right picture. 

Parted Tank Bridle Line 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

• 

 

 

The  rear  window  guard  (cage)  on  the  rear  of  the  cab  was not  secured  during  the  task allowing  the  winch  line  tail 
chain to punch through the rear window of the truck striking the driver. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

The company reminded all drivers and swampers that when winching tanks onto truck, the bottom front edge of the 
tank should be positioned so the tank is prevented from kicking out.  This can be done by lining up the bottom edge 
of the tank with a slight overhang over the edge of the mat.  The edge of the mat will prevent the tank from kicking 
out in the event that the truck fails to roll forward or the tank slips on the mat.  

•  All drivers were reminded to ensure that the cage of the rear window is always in the closed and locked position.  
•  All employees were reminded that the bridles, on tanks used to attach to the winch line, should be inspected and 

replaced as necessary. 

 
Credit to Enform Safety Alert: SA-2014-02 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2014 

