Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 22 
 

EQUIPMENT FAILURE DURING PERFORATING RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  removing  the  spent  perforating  gun  from  the  hole  after  perforating  the  5th  stage  of  a  horizontal 
hydraulically fractured completion, the  wire rope  parted from the rope socket allowing  the  gun  to fall  to the 
ground.  There were no injuries or damage.   
 
The lubricator had been lifted from the wellhead and positioned 50 feet (15.24 meters) above the ground to 
lower  the  30  foot  (9.14  meters)  long  spent  perforating  gun.    The  gun  was  lowered  out  of  the  lubricator  to 
within 1 foot (30.5cm) of the ground when the rope socket failed thus allowing the gun to drop vertically to 
ground level and then fall over onto the ground. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Re-heading of the wireline is normally done every 8-10 runs during normal service windows.  This time 
period might be too long of an interval.  The procedure failed to identify that the perforating gun could fall 
over if the rope socket failed. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company reminded all personnel that Pre-Job Safety Analyses and discussions that identify job 
steps, hazards and specific persons responsible to implement hazard controls should continue to be 
standard operating procedure.  JSA’s must incorporate the below procedures. 

•  The company established a new requirement of re-heading the wireline after 4 runs. 
•  The company modified the standard operating procedure so that, after lifting the lubricator off the 

wellhead it will be lowered to within ~15 feet (4.6 meters) of the ground prior to positioning the lubricator 
to lower the gun; this will reduce the risk of the gun falling flat to the ground by containing it within the 
lubricator should the line part from the rope socket. 

•  The company emphasized that only necessary personnel are in the area around each completion 

activity.  In this case, once the lubricator is positioned it will be raised and the gun lowered while only 
those wireline personnel needed to stab the gun into the lay down carrier will be allowed under the 
lubricator.  All others will be to the side and aware of the gun’s position until it is safely on the ground.  
This is particularly true for those under or near any suspended loads or high pressure operations. 

•  The company instructed all departments and regions to disseminate this Safety Alert to all perforating 

crews during pre-job safety meetings and post it in the completions trailers so that they are aware of the 
dropped object hazard. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2013 

