Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 31 
 

FALL OVERBOARD RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A roustabout onboard a jack up drilling rig fell overboard.  He was recovered from the water shortly afterwards 
by  a  Fast  Rescue  Craft  that  was  deployed  by  the  stand-by  vessel.    CPR  was  given  while  the  Fast  Rescue 
Craft  returned  to  the  stand-by  vessel.    Further  attempts  to  revive  him  onboard  the  stand-by  vessel  were 
unsuccessful.  Following consultation with the shore-based doctor the employee was transported to shore.  On 
arrival he was pronounced dead.   
 
Overview of events:  This report is prepared to document and disseminate the facts relating to the incident as 
known to the investigation team. 
 
1.  A temporary deluge system was rigged up to provide water-cooling against radiated heat generated by a 

well test flare.  

2.  Four days later at approximately 18:00 hours, the well testing operations were complete.  At 18:30 hours 

the deck crew was prepared to rig down the fire hoses. 

3.  Shortly afterwards, the night Toolpusher gave instructions to the Crane Operator to dismantle and stow the 

temporary hoses that had been rigged up for cooling purposes.  

4.  At approximately 18:50 hours, the deceased and his immediate supervisor started to dismantle the hose 
protecting  No.  2  lifeboat  (see  attachment  1).    A  fire  hose,  supplied  from  a  fire  hydrant  on  the  starboard 
helideck  stairs  was  hung  between  the  stairs  and  No.  2  lifeboat.    The  fire  hose  terminated  with  a  nozzle 
connected to the hose by a positively latched coupling which requires the use of both hands to disconnect.  
The  nozzle/hose  arrangement  was  then  connected  to  the  davit  by  a  long  tie  wrap  (3  tie  wraps  looped 
together) fastened to the inboard box girder  

5.  The main body of the hose between the fire hydrant and the nozzle lay over open water and hung with a 

“belly” in the hose. 

6.  From this point onwards there are no eyewitnesses to the exact sequence of events who can say how or 
why the deceased fell overboard.  His supervisor was the last person to see him at which time he had one 
foot on the rung of the vertical ladder at No. 2 lifeboat.  The vertical ladder is adjacent to the handrails at 
the rig’s perimeter.  The hose was found hanging from the fire hydrant and disconnected from the nozzle 
secured to the lifeboat davit. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Distributed and communicated this safety alert  
•  The risk of falling overboard is well recognized in the offshore industry.  This incident highlights the need to 

remain ever vigilant.  

•  Conducted a review of all rigs/installations to identify areas where the potential for similar incidents exists. 
 
IADC Note See IADC Alerts:  98 – 19, 01 1 24, 02 – 13, 03 – 27, and IADC APRG Section 4.2 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2003 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
Attachment 1  
 
No. 2 Lifeboat, showing the original position of the hose.   

   

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2003 

