Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 22 
 

NEAR MISS—EXPLODING BATTERY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
Mechanic’s  helper  was  moving  a  charged  battery  on  a  two  –  wheeled  dolly  with  one  battery  cable  still 
connected  to  the  battery.    The  cable  fell  and  contacted  the  other  battery  post  producing  a  direct  short 
causing the battery to explode. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
An employee was transporting battery without removing the terminal cables creating the potential for a direct 
short.    The  proper  procedure  for  transporting  the  battery  was  not  known  or  understood  by  personnel,  and 
supervision was inadequate.  Employee was in a hurry and failed to see the hazard of not disconnecting all 
the cables from the battery posts. 

 
WHAT WENT WELL:   
Reporting the incident gives the entire company the opportunity to discuss how this kind of occurrence can 
be  prevented  at  their  job  sites.    Employee’s  eyes  were  somewhat  protected  by  safety  glasses,  although 
goggles and face shields are required when handling batteries. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the following: 
 

When performing any task, think about the worse thing that can go wrong.  A similar incident occurred nearly 
two  years  ago.    The  lesson  learned  from  the  earlier  incident  was  to  protect  the  battery  from  contact  by 
enclosing  it  in  a  covered  battery  box  to  prevent  exposure  to  ignition  sources  and  contact  with  the 
environment.   

 

NOTE:   

Often  when  carrying  out  simple  tasks,  we  fail  to  recognize  the  potential  hazards.    Make  hazard 
identification a part of every task you perform, even if the task is only walking down stairs or across 
location, or in this case, moving a battery on a dolly from point A to point B.  Ask yourself, “What can 
go wrong?”  Use total observation techniques safety observation training programs, remember BBI 
(check for hazards “Below, Behind, and Inside”).  Consider the energy sources associated with each 
task, in this case of moving a battery.  Chemical, electrical, gravity and motion are all energy sources 
present  in  the  task.    Identify  all  the  batteries  on  your  rig’s  location  and  review  how  they  are  being 
stored and managed.    

Batteries  can  explode  under  normal  operating  conditions,  such  as  starting  an  engine.    They  can 
explode when  jump  starting,  or  if  they  are  short  circuited  as  in  this  incident,  or  sitting  in  a  parked 
vehicle  or  sitting  on  a  table.    Assume  that  any  battery  might  explode when  you  least  expect  it  and 
take the appropriate steps to prevent it. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2006 

