Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 05 

DROPPED OBJECTS RESULT IN TWO LTIs 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two lost time incidents occurred on separate occasions when employees were struck by falling rubber 
guides from Top Drive Back Up Wrenches (BUW).  
 
Incident one:  The rig had finished drilling the well and was in process of making a wiper trip.  The driller 
attempted to break a stand at the top drive connection.  The BUW was positioned incorrectly grabbing one 
part of cross -over sub.  The torque boost was used to break the connection at the upper well control valve 
safety clamp.  This caused the clamp to fall on top of the BUW.  The driller proceeded to pick up the stand 
and to make the connection at the rotary table.  The driller started pulling the drill string when the lower 
safety clamp on the bottom part of the BUW caught the stabbing rubber guides and the holding bolts were 
sheared off thus; allowing the rubber guides to fall 95 feet to the rig floor striking the IP. 
 
Incident two:  While pulling out of the hole to make up a new bottom-hole assembly, the Assistant Driller 
broke out the TD connection at monkeyboard.  The driller then picked up the blocks to check to see that the 
top drive was screwed out of the stand.  He then lowered the blocks hitting top of the drill pipe stand.  The 
rubber guide’s holding bolts sheared off allowing it to fall to the rig floor (approximately 100 feet).  The IP was 
struck in the face and cheek. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
 

In both of these incidents there was a failure by the drillers to identify that the BUWs were 
positioned improperly.   

  Poor communications occurred between the drillers and derrickmen in each incident.  
  The Top Drive must not be set down on the pipe.   
  Equipment such as the torque boost was improperly used to break a connection as stated in the 

first incident.   

  The BUW cylinder adjust pins require proper calibration to avoid grabbing the crossover sub.   
  The JSA was not adequate in identifying such hazards.   
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig supervisors that the Driller is responsible in his operation to see that the Top Drive is 
not set down on the pipe. 
Instructed drillers that they need to make sure the BUW is aligned in the center of the pipe as the 
TD is lowered. 
Instructed drillers to ensure that the cameras are operable and being used. 

 
  Additional training may be required for the Driller to understand the operation of breaking out drill 

 

pipe from the Top Drive.  

  There is simply no substitute for good communication between the Driller and the Derrickman. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2010 

