 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 32 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

CARGO HANDLING INCIDENT 

Backloading of 9 5/8" casing onto the supply boat was taking place.  Each lift consisted of 5 pieces of casing 
(3 on bottom, 2 on top) pre-slung with wire straps secured with wire clamps (bulldog clips). Deck space was 
available  starboard  aft.    The  boat  had  a  slight  list  to  starboard  to  prevent  casing  shifting  amidships.  No 
stanchions were fitted in the deck.  The tenth load was landed on top of previously loaded bundles of casing.  
As  the  deck  crewman  approached  the  bundle  to  unhook  it  a  bundle  of  casing  -  still  within  its  wire  straps  - 
started  to  shift,  rolling  over  onto  the  man  trapping  his  legs.    The  bundle  that  had  just  been  lifted  had  to  be 
unhooked before the bundle on the man’s legs could be lifted clear.  He is expected to make a full recovery. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

The bundle was inspected after the accident. The bulldog clips were still fitted correctly and the casing was still 
retained  inside  the  wire  slings,  however  they  were  not  tight  enough  to  prevent  the  casing  inside  moving. 
Movement of the boat contributed to the casing rolling. 

View of casing bundles on deck 

 

5 pieces of casing in a bundle 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

The main recommendation to prevent recurrence is:   

Ensure that the requirements of the OSV Code (Code of Practice for the Carriage of Cargoes and Persons by 
Offshore Supply Vessels, published by IMO) are followed, as referenced and required by Company Rules.  In 
particular ensure that:  

•  Bundles are double wrapped, choked, bulldogged and tie-wrapped (refer to NSL International Rigging and 

Lifting Handbook, see.  An alternative to bulldogs are ASBRO Wire Clamps ™. 

•  Further detailed guidance on the types of slings to be used and number of tubulars to be lifted in each 

bundle can be obtained from the company on request.  An odd number of tubulars must always be lifted in 
each bundle. 

•  Safe havens and unobstructed escape routes are provided on decks. 
•  Stanchions are fitted into decks to prevent cargo movement. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2004 

