Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 28  

 

DRILLER INATTENTION RESULTS IN DROPPED BLOCKS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While tripping in the hole, the driller was washing and reaming due to a tight hole.  After raising a full stand 
past the  derrick board,  the driller started to lower the stand back down  when  they  hit a bridge causing the 
blocks to lay over the top drive which allowed the drill line to acquire slack above the blocks.  As the blocks 
were  falling  towards  the  V-door  the  driller  clutched  the  draw  works  and  at  the  same  time  the  bit  broke 
through  the  bridge  allowing  the  blocks  and  top  drive  to  free fall  and  hit  the  end  of  the  slack  drill  line.    The 
sudden increase of weight parted the drill line 228 feet (69 meters) from the drum of the draw works.  The 
blocks, top drive, and the drilling line fell to the rig floor.   

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  An excess amount of slack in the drill line allowed the blocks and top drive to free fall once the bit broke 

•  Due to simultaneous operations the driller was not paying full attention to the weight indicator and was 

distracted by other operations going on at the same time. 

through the bridge. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  The crew was reminded that a JSA for washing and reaming shall be reviewed and/or updated to point 

out possible hazard scenarios and the information shall be shared among all crews throughout the fleet. 

•  The company installed a new block dolly system that will stay in the mast at all times.  This will prevent 
the blocks from hanging out over the top drive creating slack in the drilling line during similar operations 
or events. 

•  The rig manager and driller were instructed that if the driller is distracted in any way during simultaneous 
operations he shall stop the job to regain focus on the task and keep constant  attention  on  the  weight 
indicator. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2012 

