 
ALERT 05 –  21 
 

 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
  

platform.   

mixing platform.   

the ground.   

 

• 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

FALLS FROM MUD MIXING PLATFORM 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Employee was mixing barite and removed the chain barrier to allow the forklift to load a new pallet of barite.  
The  safety  chain  was  not  replaced.    Employee  broke  the  bands  and  when  the  band  released  the  sacks 
shifted.  He jumped back and fell off the platform, falling approximately 7 feet, landing on his backside.     

A  similar  incident  occurred  several  years  ago.    An  employee  picked  up  an  empty  pallet  after  mixing  the 
product and tossed it to the ground.  He was standing on the band and the force of the flying pallet pulled 
him off the platform.  He was 14 feet up and landed on his feet shattering both heels.  This injury required 
several years of rehabilitation. 

Another  incident  occurred  when  an  employee  on  the  mud  platform  cut  the  bands  on  the  pallet  and  was 
attempting to pull the stuck bands out of the pallet.  The band came loose striking his face, knocking off his 
safety glasses and slicing his eyeball.  This became an LTI.  There is a proper way to manage pallets and 
banding.   

There  was  a  failure  to  replace  chain  barrier  after  the  pallet  was  placed  on  platform.    Employee  exposed 
himself  to  a  recognizable  hazard  by  failing  to  replace  the  safety  chain  before  continuing  work.    The 
employees were placed in harms way due to the bands not being removed before the pallets were placed on 
the elevated platforms.  The platforms had limited working space to remove the bands from the pallets.   

 
CORRECTIVE  ACTIONS:    To  address  this  incident,  this  company  issued  the  following  to  rig 
personnel: 
 
•  The  chain  should  be  put  back  in  place  after  the  pallet  of  barite  (chemicals)  is  placed  securely  on  the 

•  The  forklift  operator  should  break  and  remove  all  bands  on  the  ground  before  setting  pallet  on  mud 

•  Bands should be slowly removed.  If stuck on the pallet they should be trimmed flush with the pallet.   
 

•  Fork lift operator should have a band cutter for cutting bands. 
 

•  Pallets, empty sacks and trash should be removed from the mud platform by the forklift and not tossed to 

If the mud sacks have shifted on the pallet, or the pallet is in poor condition, sacks should be re-
stacked on a good pallet before setting them on the platform.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2005 

