Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 07 
 

ARM CAUGHT IN PINCH POINT ON HYDRAULIC CATWALK RESULTS IN 

DEEP CONTUSION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While rolling a joint of 13 3/8 inch (33cm) casing onto the hydraulic catwalk, an employee was moving away 
from the equipment on the snow-covered ground when his left forearm was caught between the casing and 
the  indexer  arm  of  the  catwalk.  He  received  a  deep  contusion;  however,  the  injury  could  have  been  much 
more severe as it could have resulted in multiple fractures to his arm. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The indexer arm was engaged while the employee was in close proximity to the indexer arm and casing. 
•  The  ground  was  snow  covered  and  slick  and  the  employee  slipped  as  he  was  moving  away  from  the 

equipment.  

•  The bars for the casing to roll on between the pipe racks and the catwalk were too low. 
•  The employee had trouble getting one end of the casing to roll up far enough toward the catwalk to be 

picked up by the indexer arms. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All  rig  crews  were  reminded  that  they  must  not  engage  the  indexers  while  an  employee  is  in  close 

proximity to the catwalk. 

•  The company reminded toolpushers that a JSA / Work Plan for picking up casing should include steps to 

improve conditions for proper footing, prior to beginning the operation. 

•  Catwalk operators  were reminded that the  pipe racks, indexer  bars, and catwalk must be lined up and 

leveled to ensure free movement of the casing between the pipe racks and indexer. 

•  All employees were reminded that when an employee experiences difficulty rolling pipe to the indexers, 

communication must include a “stop work” while assistance is called to help. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2014 

