Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 06 
 

NEAR MISSES INVOLVING RIG BRAKING SYSTEMS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently a company has experienced several serious incidents that are of a kind you can describe as 

a “Driller’s worst nightmare”.  

1.  One driller had miscommunication with a crewman who, instead of opening the valves to fill the 

trip tank, disengaged the auxiliary brake handle.  Because the electric auxiliary brake was not 
engaged, the drawworks brakes overheated resulting in the driller not being able to stop the 
blocks, which ran into the top drive rail stops. 

2.  On another rig the driller turned the hydromatic brake water valve the wrong direction.  This 
resulted in shutting off the water supply to the auxiliary hydromatic brake which caused the 
drawworks brakes to overheat.  He was unable to stop the descent of the blocks and the 
elevators which struck the rotary table, bending the joint of pipe in the elevators. 

 
No injuries resulted from these incidents and each could have been far worse. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
 

valve.  

 

In the first incident there was a breakdown in communications between the driller and crewman.   

o  The floorman came from a crew that used different hand signals. 
o  Misunderstanding by the crewman regarding the rig operation and systems. 
o  A bolt and nut were used to lock the electric brake handle to lock it in the engaged position.   

 

In the second incident the driller was not aware of the valve position for water to be supplied to the 
auxiliary hydromatic brake.   

  There was a lack of labeling to indicate the open and closed on the hydromatic brake water supply 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  To address the communication problem in the first incident on rigs where supervision and crews 

speak different languages, the company developed rig fleet-wide standardized hand signals.  

  The bolt and nut securing the electric brake engaging handle were replaced with a padlock with 

the key kept in the driller’s control.   

  The electric brake handle was painted safety yellow to make it more visible.   
  The remedial action plan for the second brake incident included labeling the water control valve 

to the hydromatic brake showing the direction of open and closed.   

  Review with all crewmen the danger signs signifying overheating mechanical brakes.  When 

mechanical brakes display signs of overheating, they are likely being misused.   

 
These incidents have stimulated discussions among operations personnel.  A memo was sent to the 

field to solicit comments about these and other issues surrounding the drawworks brake systems.  

The hope is that this safety bulletin will further that discussion. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Both incidents and remedial action plans should prompt each of us to ask, “How are we managing 

the brake systems on our rig(s)?”  Audit your brake system procedures, reviewing how brakes are 

used in your operation before your worst nightmare becomes reality! 

 
 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2010 

