Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11-19  

DRILLING LINE SLIPS OUT OF RETAINER  

CLAMP RESULTS IN RIG DOWNTIME 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While tripping in the hole, the driller was hoisting the top drive and empty elevators to latch a stand when a 
loud  “slapping”  noise  was  heard  from  the  drawworks  and  severe  vibration  was  noted  in  the  brake  handle.  
The block’s travel was stopped, and a large “bird’s nest” was seen on the drawworks drum.  The rig floor was 
cleared of all personnel and a risk assessment was performed.  It was decided to install a short hang-off line 
in the mast to hang the traveling block in its then-current position.  When the drilling line was inspected, it 
was discovered that the drilling line had pulled out of the drilling line clamp in the drawworks.  The loose end 
of  the  drilling  line striking the  drawworks  guards  was  determined  to  have  been the  cause of the  “slapping” 
noise heard at the time of the incident.  The damaged drilling line was removed from the drum, and a new 
line  clamp  was  installed  including  new  bolts,  nuts  and  lock  washers.    The  line  was  spooled  back  onto  the 
drawworks and the blocks were lowered and re-hung at the normal height for slipping and cutting drilling line.  
A  thorough  inspection  of  the  drawworks,  top  drive,  mast  and  drilling  line  were  then  performed.    Minor 
damage  was  repaired  on  grease  lines and  crown-saver  air  lines.   The  crown-saver  was  tested  and  the rig 
resumed normal operations.  This event resulted in 13 hours of rig repair time; no injuries were reported. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
  The  rig  had  last  slipped  and  cut  drilling  line  approximately  two  weeks  prior  to  this  event  and  no 

problems with the drilling line or clamp had been noted since the last cut.   

  The ton miles since last cut were within acceptable limits at the time of the event.   
  The  drilling  line  clamp  on  this  drawworks  uses  four  hex  bolts  to  retain  the  drilling  line.    Upon 
examination of the drilling line clamp, it was noticed that the two of the four bolts on the clamp had 
been tightened about two rounds of the nut less than the other two bolts.  

  Further examination revealed excessive wear of the clamp itself, as evidenced by a widening of the 

grooved throat of the clamp body by approximately 7 to 8 mm (5/16”). 

  This led to a conclusion that the immediate cause of the event was that the clamp had been under-

tightened at the time of the last slip and cut.   
It is less clear to what extent the generally worn condition of clamp reduced the clamping force on 
the drilling line, but the condition of the clamp cannot be eliminated as a possible contributing factor 
in the result that the line slipped over time and eventually worked its way out of the clamp. 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The written rig operations policy guidelines for slipping and cutting drilling line were amended to include:  

  Requirement for visual inspection of drilling line clamp; 
  An  inspection  guideline,  with  acceptance/rejection  criteria,  for  visual  inspection  of  the  drilling  line 

clamp, bolts, U-bolts and nuts; 

  Proper clamp tightening procedures, including recommended nut torque; 
  Appropriate  interval  for  dimensional  and  non-destructive  testing  (NDT)  inspection  of  drilling  line 

  Appropriate interval for replacement of bolts or U-bolts, nuts and lock washers. 

  A pre-job meeting must be conducted prior to slipping and cutting drilling line to review the procedures as 

 

a reminder of the importance of proper inspection and tightening of clamps and fasteners. 
Inspection of wire rope retainers and retaining clamps on all lifting equipment which utilizes wire rope for 
lifting  including  but  not  limited  to  drawworks,  floor  winches,  man-rider  winches,  utility  winches,  casing 
stabbing boards, cranes, etc. to be performed on all rigs. 

  Lessons learned and corrective actions requirements to be distributed to all operations and maintenance 

clamp; 

personnel. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2011 

