Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 04 
 

EXPLOSION / FLASH FIRE ON RIG FLOOR  

FOLLOWING GAS RELEASE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Following a logging run on drill pipe the drill string was pulled out of the hole (POOH).  During the trip out, the 
well did not take the correct amount of fluid while pulling through the horizontal section.  Instead of returning 
to bottom, the decision was made to continue POOH.  After laying down all the logging tools, the drill string 
was run into the hole to TD in order to clean out the well.  The driller then pulled back to 4303 m to circulate, 
during which time he observed a flow increase, so he shut in the well.  The decision was made to circulate 
out any influx using the Driller’s Method.  During this circulation returns were lost and the BOP was opened 
to  observe  the  well.    Mud  and  gas  came  through  the  table  so  the  BOP  was  closed  again.    Gas  alarms 
sounded.    Pumping  was  resumed.    After  a  time  of  pumping,  pressure  gauges  read  “0.”    The  BOP  was 
opened again to observe the well.  Again, mud and gas came through the table and gas alarms sounded.  
An explosive flash fire then occurred.  Eight persons were injured.  All were evacuated to hospital.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Mud  weight  was  insufficient  to  control  the  well.    Mud  weight  was  approximately  0.5  ppg 

underbalanced.   

  Standard Operating Procedures were not followed during trip.  The trip tank and trip sheet were not 
used  during  the  trip  out  of  the  hole  to  indicate  mud  volume  discrepancies  prior  to  start  of  circulation.  
Although it was recognized that the well was not taking the correct fluid volume, corrective action was not 
taken.  
Incorrect  assessment  of  critical  well  control  situation  in  spite  of  known  underbalance.    It  was 
assumed the influx was “trip gas.”  

 

  Well-kill procedures not followed.  A kill sheet was not completed and pump strokes were not being 

counted.   

  BOP was opened twice without knowing the status of the well.   
  Gas  alarms  did  not  produce  the  appropriate  response.    Alarms  were  deactivated  and  then  reset. 

Additional personnel came to the rig floor rather than reducing the number of personnel. 

  Wind direction.  Allowed the escaped gas to accumulate on and under rig floor and driller’s cabin. 
 
WHAT WENT RIGHT 
 
  Off-duty personnel mustered when gas alarms sounded. 
  Well was quickly and completely shut in after the fire. 
  SCR system to floor was shut down after the fire. 
  Fires on the floor were quickly extinguished after the explosion. 
  Medical treatment on rig and evacuation was well done and timely.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig supervisors to always flow check through the choke first before opening the BOP.  
If total strokes to kill the well have not been circulated, never open the BOP to check the well.  Check 
for  flow  by  opening  choke  with  BOP  closed.    If  losses  have  occurred,  treat  losses  until  circulation  is 
restored and continue killing the well.  

  More  effective  well-control  training  to  recognize  a  critical  well-control  situation;  how  to  perform 

calculations; procedures and methods for handling lost-returns while shut in and circulating.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
  More effective training to recognize and respond to alarms and non-standard situations.  
  Mandatory use of trip tank (with trip sheet to determine losses or gains).  
 

Instructed  rig  management  and  maintenance  personnel  to  ensure  all  possible  ignition  sources  on  or 
around the rig floor are isolated and meet hazardous-area requirements and standards. 
Improve ventilation on and under drill floor and Driller’s cabin to prevent gas accumulation.  

 
  Safety Management System audits are to include audits of operational procedures.  These audits are to 

be conducted utilizing cross-functional personnel from operations, maintenance, engineering, etc.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2009 

