Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 36 
 

HIGH PRESSURE BOP FLUID RESULTS 

IN AN INJECTION INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured person was changing out fittings from a blue bypass valve (pressure approximately 5000 psi).  He 
was  attempting  to  bleed  off  the  pressure  on  the  line  between  the  Moonpool  and  the  High  Pressure  Unit  by 
loosening  a  3/8  inch  compression  fitting  on  a  stainless  steel  high  pressure  tubing.    The  injured  person  was 
holding  the  tubing  in  place  covered  with  a  rag  when  depressurizing  the  line.    As  the  tubing  nut  was  being 
loosened, high-pressure BOP fluid was released off the line through the ferrule.  The high-pressure BOP fluid 
along with particles of the rag were injected into the injured person’s hand.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Safe work procedures were not followed. 
2.  A permit to work was not initiated.   
3.  A Safe Job Assessment was not properly executed. 
4.  The injured person was in an improper work position for the task. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Issued a standing work instruction to re-confirm pre-existing procedures: 
 
•  The Drilling Superintendent and / or OIM will provide authorization for any piece of well control equipment 

to be worked on.   

•  Any work being done on any piece of high-pressure equipment, will require a Work Permit, Safe Job 

Assessment (SJA) and toolbox discussion before work commences. 

•  Senior Subsea Engineer is to verify SJA before work commences. 
•  No pressurized equipment that has a fitting of any type will be de-pressurized by loosening the fitting.         
•  All pressures are will be vented off safely before work commences. 
• 

In the event that an unforeseen circumstance during the task occurs, the task will be re-evaluated and 
noted before continuing. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2003 

