Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

BATTERY EXPLODES WHILE BEING JUMP STARTED 

 
ALERT 05 – 10 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

In a recent rig incident a 12 volt battery exploded while being jump started.  The 12 volt battery was fitted to 
the Pressure Test Pump.  Booster or jumper cables were connected from the 12 volt battery to the 24 volt 
battery of the Forklift.  The Pressure Pump was in the vicinity of the Catwalk at the time.  The individuals who 
attempted  to  jump  start  the  batteries  were  obviously  unaware  of  the  difference  in  voltage  and  the  correct 
method of jump starting a battery.  Fortunately the battery was the only casualty and there was no injury to 
personnel. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

incorrect terminals.  

do.  

the Mechanic’s workshop.  

Learning’s  

1. Individuals  were  not  aware  of  the  correct  method  of  jump  starting  as  the  cables  were  placed  on  the 

2. Individuals were not aware of the incompatibility between 12V and 24V.  
3. Individuals did not call for assistance even though it would appear they did not fully comprehend what to 

4. No spare battery was available so unserviceable battery could not be disconnected and trickle charged in 

5. Other 12V batteries on site i.e. vehicle were not suitable to operate the Pressure Pump 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company issued the following: 

•  Only Mechanic or Electrician should be responsible for charging / Jump Starting batteries.  
•  Procedure for jump starting is to be in accordance with Company Procedure 009.  See Attached.  
•  No battery charging or jump starting is to occur within 45 meters (150 ft) of the wellhead i.e. outside the 

hazardous area.  

•  Consideration should be given to storing a spare battery.  
•  See the instructions on the following pages.  

The lesson out of this incident is – If you don’t know or your not quite sure ASK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Exploded Battery 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
The company issued the following Instructions to Rig Personnel: 

JUMP STARTING A 12 VOLT BATTERY 

 

 

 

Jump starting vehicles is performed regularly, however often incorrectly, which could cause a serious injury. 
Extreme  care  must  be  taken  when  jump  starting  an  engine  or  serious  bodily  damage  may  result.    If  jump 
staring is not done correctly, expensive damage can result to a vehicle’s electrical system, particularly where 
fitted with electronic ignitions  

If the vehicle operating manual is available follow its recommended procedures.  If it is not available or there 
are no specific instructions, follow these steps.  

1. Tradesmen (mechanic or electrician) only to conduct vehicle jump starting.  

2. NEVER jump start a vehicle within the hazardous area of the wellhead.  Minimum distance should be at 

least 45 meters (150 feet) away.  

3. Safety goggles should be worn to protect the eyes.  When jump started, batteries generate high volumes of 

hydrogen gas which is extremely explosive.  Naked flames must be avoided at all times.  

4. Check that cables are not frayed or damaged.  

5. DO NOT lean over batteries while jump starting.  

6. Check  to  ensure  both  batteries  are  the  same  voltage.    Jump starting  24V  to  12V  is  very  dangerous  and 

should be avoided.  

7. If failed battery is open circuit, do not attempt to jump start.  Open circuit batteries can be detected by:  

a. Battery volts reading zero even after a high rate discharge test is applied  

b. When the battery will not accept charge current  

8. Check vehicles are not touching and are in park or neutral.  

9. Make sure both vehicles ignitions are switched OFF and all electrical equipment is OFF.  

a. Connect the vehicles in the following EXACT sequence making sure the jumper or booster leads are 

clear of any moving parts.  See diagram on following page.  

b. Take  the  RED  jumper  lead  and  connect  to  the  POSITIVE  terminal  (marked  +  or  POS)  on  the 

discharged battery on the stalled vehicle  

c. Connect the other end of the RED jumper lead to the POSITIVE terminal of the charged battery on the 

starting vehicle  

d. Take the BLACK jumper lead and connect one end to the NEGATIVE terminal (marked – or NEG) of 

the charged battery on the starting vehicle  

e. Make the final connection to the engine block or chassis or the stalled vehicle (negative earth vehicles 

only).  Never use air conditioner, brakes or fuel lines for engine earth.  

f. Start the engine of the starting or donor vehicle and allow to normalize for 5 minutes.  

g. Start the engine of the stalled vehicle.  

h. After starting, allow engine of the stalled vehicle to fast idle for about 10 minutes before disconnecting 
the jumper leads to allow the cars electrical system to balance.  This reduces the possibility of damage 
to vehicle electronics.  

i.  Remove the BLACK jumper lead first from the vehicle by unclipping from the discharged battery then 

the charged battery.  

j.  Repeat above step for the RED jumper lead.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

It is recommended that the discharged battery be fully charged using a battery charger.  

 

 
10. 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2005 

