Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 24  
 

MISUSE OF HIGH PRESSURE CLEANER RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured person (IP) was assisting the Night Mechanic in attempting to clear the cellar pump suction line 
which is used to empty the cellar.  The IP, who was a short-service employee with only three (3) days on the 
rig, held the hose while the Night Mechanic used the high pressure wash down gun inside the hose.  When 
the Night Mechanic activated the gun, the high pressure spray from the gun took him by surprise.  The high 
pressure wash down gun kicked up and the nozzle swiped the IP across his face from his chin to his right 
ear. 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The IP was a short-service employee who had only worked three (3) days on the rig. 
•  Clearing the hose in such a manner using a high pressure wash down gun when one man is in the line of 

•  The job was uncontrolled. 
•  The  person  using  the  high  pressure  wash  down  gun  did  not  understand  the  risks  the  IP  was  being 

fire was hazardous. 

exposed to. 

•  The high pressure  wash down gun has a regulator  which can be adjusted to change the pressure  and 

should have been regulated down to suit the needs of the job.  

•  The high pressure gun pressure regulator had been adjusted to its maximum pressure setting, causing 

the unexpected kickback. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The rig personnel were instructed to order the correct ball valve / filter for use with the pump suction line 

to reduce the risk of foreign objects blocking the suction line. 

•  Supervisors  were  reminded  that  they  are  to  hold  mandatory  Pre-job  safety  meeting  prior  to  any  task 

requiring the use of the high pressure wash down gun. 

•  The rig personnel were reminded that only authorized personnel are to adjust the pressure regulator of 

the high pressure wash down gun. 

•  Maintenance personnel were instructed that a pressure gauge is to be fitted on the pump. 
•  The  company  policy  on  short  service  employees  regarding,  induction,  training  and  how  they  are 

supervised at the rig site was re-enforced with all employees. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2012 

