Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 38 

 

 

JOINT OF DRILL PIPE FALLS TO RIG FLOOR 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A locking safety hook and 4½” IF thread drill pipe lift cap was being used to pick up a single joint of 5” drill pipe 
from the V-Door.  As the joint of drill pipe was raised with the air hoist and was being held several feet above 
the floor, an employee attempted to remove the pin end protector.  The hook and drill pipe lift cap separated 
and the joint of drill pipe struck the floor and then fell across the floor. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Although not a contributing factor in this incident, the investigation revealed that the locking safety hook was 
worn beyond the manufacturer’s maximum clearance.  A copy of the manufacturer’s inspection data sheet for 
Maximum In-Service Clearance is shown. (See Figure 1) Figure 2 shows over 0.3” or just under 3/8” opening 
between  the  latch  and  the  body  of  the  hook.    According  to  the  manufacturer,  the  maximum  allowable 
clearance between the body and the latch on this 3/8” hook is 0.09” or 3/32”. 
 
The employee indicated that he heard the hook close but did not see the locking safety hook close around the 
lift  cap.    Based  on  that,  the  assumption  is  made  that  the  hook  was  never  latched  around  the  lift  cap.    It 
probably closed on the lift cap and never locked; thereby the lift cap was not sitting in the throat, but on the tip 
of  the  hook.  (See  Photo  in  Figure  3)    The  twisting  motion  when  the  employee  attempted  to  remove  the 
protector  from  the  joint  of  pipe resulted  in  the  lift  cap  twisting  out  of  the  hook  tip  and  falling  to  the  floor  and 
across the derrick. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  When using a locking safety hook the employee shall visually inspect prior to use and ensure that the hook 

2. 

3. 

is latched and locked prior to lifting the load.  
Inspect all locking safety hooks immediately and remove from service all hooks that have a gap between 
the hook and the latch larger than specified by the manufacture.  
Include  all  locking  safety  hooks  in  the  rigs  lifting  gear  register  and  ensure  all  lifting  appliances  are 
inspected in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations.  

4.  A  copy  of  the  attached  inspection  data  sheet  showing  maximum  allowable  clearance  for  locking  safety 

hooks shall be available on board the rig.  

5.  Existing (old style) Locking Safety Hooks currently in use be replaced as they become unserviceable with 
one that has side safety guards to keep the latch from accidentally opening if hit or bumped. (See figure 4 
attached.)  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2004 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

 

Figure 2 = 0.3 inch 

Figure 3 

 

Figure 1 

 

 
Figure 4 Safety locking hook with safety guards. 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2004 

