Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 22 
 

SELF-RETRACTING LIFELINE (SRL) ANCHOR POST FAILURE RESULTS IN 

NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew was drilling ahead when a third party employee drew their attention to the rig’s crown.  The crew 
looked up and noticed that the SRL anchor post was hanging from the retracting line to the side of the mast.  
Operations were immediately stopped and the crew discovered that the SRL anchor post had fractured at the 
top of the gusset.  It then apparently fell towards the mast and came to rest when it impacted the SRL.  The 
cable was tied to an SRL and the SRL was lying over the top of the crown. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The SRL was installed on a climb assist anchor post.  Years of fatigue due to moving the rig from location to 
location,  impacting  the  SRL  during  daily  inspection  testing,  and  the  most recent  jarring  operations  were  all 
identified as causes that lead to the SRL post fracturing at the top of the gusset. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The company instructed all rigs, in their fleet, to: 

 

Inspect all posts where SRL housings are currently mounted. 

• 
•  Have the rig crew engineer the anchor post utilizing current MOC practices.  
• 
• 

Increase the frequency of a qualified comprehensive inspection of the SRL anchor post. 
Install a secondary restraint for the SRL anchor post that is attached to a structural member. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2014 

