Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 34 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

H2S INHALATION: MAN FELL FROM TOTE TANK RESULTING IN AN LTI 

The  injured  person  (IP)  was  pumping  fluid  waste  contents  from  the  hazardous  drain  tank  to  the  tote  tank  on  deck.  
Approximately 40 seconds after the fluid had been flowing, the IP called the Engine Room Operator (ERO) and asked him 
to  stop  the  pump;  at  this  time  the  ERO  noticed  that  the  Motorman’s  breathing  sounded  labored  over  the  radio.  
Communication  was broken off, and the ERO pushed the E-Stop and tried to re- contact the IP to see if he  was all right.  
When there was no response he proceeded to personally check on him.  Arriving at the scene, the ERO found the IP lying 
face down on the Deck, with obvious signs of a head injury. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Safe Job Analysis was not properly executed 
(cid:131)  Fall protection was not identified/or worn 
(cid:131)  Risk of H2S being present in the tote was not identified 

2.  Leadership/Planning/Guidance 

(cid:131)  Near-miss reported on June 14/04 regarding an H2S alarm being activated when transferring fluids from the OBM 

Tank to the Mud Pits was not followed up in a timely manner  

(cid:131)  Formal procedure controlling the risks for transferring fluids from both the hazardous drain tank and/or OBM to the 

Mud Pits or Tote Tanks was not developed prior to this incident 

3.  H2S  was  generated  due  from  stagnant  salt  water  and  rain  water  in  the  drains  from  around  the  rig  and  the  hot 

temperatures 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Developed  procedures for transferring fluids from the  Hazardous Drain Tank  and/or the OBM Tank to the Mud Pits, 

Tote Tank or Over the Side.  Procedures include such safety measures as; 

o  Continuously monitoring for H2S during the transfer;  
o  Treating tanks if H2S alarm reaches 5ppm;  
o  Transferring fluids to the tote tanks from the bottom of the totes instead of from the top;  
o  Ensuring that personnel involved in the transfer process are either on the ground monitoring fluid levels or on 

a higher level (but not on top of the tote tank) 

•  All Tote tanks were immediately tested for  H2S and treated as required.  The tote tank  involved  in this incident  was 

treated. 

1.  IP fell from; 
2.  Hit his head on green tank; 
3.  Found on deck; 
4.  Helmet location.   

1

2

3

4

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2004 

