Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 15 
 

MONKEY BOARD INCIDENT RESULTS IN MTO 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a rig move operation, the diving board had been secured with a tie back rope to the monkey board 
which  was  resting  in  a  vertical  position.    The  derrickman  had  climbed  up  on  the  monkey  board  to  align  it 
before  raising  the  mast.    At  the  same  time  a  roustabout  saw  a  rope  that  was  tied  on  the  bottom  of  the 
monkey board hindering the operation.  As the roustabout moved into position under the diving board to untie 
the rope, the derrickman cut the rope holding the diving board securely in place.  The derrickman did not look 
down to verify if it was safe to cut that particular rope.  The diving board fell approximately 1.5 meters (5 feet) 
and  hit  the  roustabout  on  the  back  of  his  head  causing  an  open  wound  injury  and  rendering  the  IP 
unconscious. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The tie back rope was cut and this allowed the diving board to free fall. 
2.  The derrickman should have been more alert to the position of the roustabout and the hazard this posed. 
3.  The roustabout should have been aware of the purpose of the secured rope. 
4.  Poor communications between both parties working. 
5.  Supervision should have provided hazard awareness and clearer work instructions. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the 
following: 
 
•  Follow the correct procedure in lowering the diving board and hinge up the handrail bolts back to the side 

rail.  

•  The diving board can be laid back against the back handrail and secured with a cable or safety strap.  
The safety cable/safety strap keeps the board from falling when the mast is being raised or lowered.  

Improve lines of communication from the Supervision to the employees 

•  Hold a JSA and identify hazards and job specific duties before the task is done. 
• 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2008 

