Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 37 
 

FATAL INCIDENT – WORKER CAUGHT BETWEEN  

OUTRIGGER AND CHASSIS OF CRANE 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Six  workers  were  preparing  a  truck-mounted  crane  for  relocation  in  a  lay-down  area  on  the  site.    During 
outrigger retraction,  one  of  the  workers  reached  across  an  extended  outrigger  beam.    It  is  thought  that he 
was attempting to retrieve a water bottle stored in a recessed area of the crane chassis.  As the outrigger 
was  retracted  into  the  sleeve,  the  worker  was  trapped  between  the  chassis  and  the  outrigger  stabilizer 
cylinder.    The  worker  was  severely  injured  and  transported  by  the  other  workers  to  the  nearby  hospital.  
Unfortunately on arrival the worker was pronounced dead.   
 

Position of the operator 
outrigger beam. 

 

 

 

 

Position  of  Worker 

reaching  across 

the 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The incident investigation revealed the following key factors that contributed to the incident: 
•  Human errors.  

o  The deceased placed himself between the crane chassis and the outrigger stabilizer cylinder.  
o  The  crane  operator  had  no  visual  contact  with  the  deceased  as  he  operated  the  controls  for  the 
outrigger from the opposite side of the crane, instead of using the controls on the other side of the 
crane.  

o  The  deceased  was  not  directly  involved  in  the  demobilization  activity  and  the  work  area  was  not 

properly barricaded off to restrict access to the crane area. 

• 

Inadequate risk awareness. 
o  There was no evidence that a toolbox talk was conducted and that the specific risks associated with 

this activity were acknowledged and properly explained to the workers involved.  

o  The work group was assembled ad-hoc for this activity comprising workers from different background 

and nationalities; hence language barriers may have hampered communication. 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Inadequate supervision.  
o  The supervisor left the work area before the task was completed as he considered this activity not 

being part of his work scope. 

Inadequate procedures and work instructions.  
o  There was no adequate method statement and Job Safety Analysis (JSA) for this activity available 
as  crane  set  up  and  breakdown  activities  were  not  properly  addressed  in  the  documentation 
provided for this job (e.g. lift plan, permit to work, JSA, etc.) 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Several  fatalities  have  occurred  in  the  Group  in  the  past  involving  crane  operations.    In  general,  risk 
management  of  those  activities  is  focused  on  the  actual  hoisting  and  lifting  operations  at  the  site  of  work.  
This incident demonstrates that crane preparation or demobilization activities involve significant safety risks 
as well and hence require rigorous HSE management controls. 
 
Supervisors and Workers are to: 
 
•  Assure  yourself  that  similar  activities  are  adequately  managed  in  your  area  of  operational  control  and 
that key controls are effectively implemented when performing these activities by asking and answering 
the following questions: 
o  Do you use similar type of equipment in your area of operation? 
o  Are preparation and demobilization activities treated as being part of your lifting and hoisting plan? 
o  Determine  if  clear  procedures  are  developed  and  work  instructions  for  these  activities  are 

communicated? 

o  Do you supervise these activities permanently? 
o  How well are your workers trained in executing the emergency response plan?   
o  Determine how you are going to deal with language problems? 

•  Conduct a toolbox talk prior to commencing the work. 
•  Ensure that the work area is barricaded off to prevent access to the crane area for those not involved in 

the crane operation. 

 
• 

• 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2008 

