Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 27 
 

FAILURE TO FOLLOW LOCKOUT PROCEDURES 

RESULTS IN A NEAR-MISS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Rig personnel were cleaning the suction screen on a mud pump when the driller activated the mud pump.  
No injuries resulted since personnel were not working on the piston rods, bull gears, etc.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Rig personnel did not follow proper lockout procedures.   
  Personnel felt pressure from the operator representative to take shortcuts to save time.  
  No pre-job meeting was held before the job started.   
  This unsafe act should have been stopped as per the company’s job observation program. 
  There  was  no  co-ordination  between  simultaneous  operations  (drilling  ahead  and  mud  pump 

maintenance).   

pump suction screen.   

  Rig personnel working on the mud pump did not notify the driller that they were going to clean the mud 

  Through  the  incident  investigation,  rig  supervisors  found  that  additional  training  is  needed  on  lockout 
procedures.    Some  of  the  rig  personnel  were  not  aware  of  the  importance  of  following  proper  lockout 
procedures, the hazards of not locking out equipment, nor the expectations of the supervisor to perform 
lockout procedures when any equipment is being worked on. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Division  management  emphasized  to  the  crews  that  no  one  is  expected  to  work  so  fast  that  safety 
procedures  cannot  be  followed.    The  primary  goal  of  the  company’s  “STOPTM”  program  is  to  train 
personnel how to spot and address this type of unsafe act.   

  Rig personnel were instructed that they are to hold pre-job safety meetings.   
  Rig personnel were instructed to plan the job.  Working safely is not an accident, it happens because of 

good planning.  

  Rig  personnel  were  instructed  that  simultaneous  operations  need to  be  planned  and  that  all  personnel 

involved need to be notified of planned activities.  

  Retraining of company’s lockout program was held for personnel on the rig.   
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2010 

