Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 36 
 

JARS FIRED WITH DRILL STRING IN SLIPS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The drill crew was tripping 4” drill pipe in the hole with a whipstock assembly at 1,824 feet.  With the drill string 
suspended  in  the  slips  in  the  rotary  and  the  elevators  latched  onto  the  drill  pipe,  the  jars  in  the  hole  fired 
unexpectedly.    The  drill  string  “jumped”  in  the  slips  several  times  due  to  the  recoil  effect  of  the  drill  string.  
Each recoil resulted in the drill string setting lower in the slips until the elevators caught the load and prevented 
the drill pipe from possibly falling into the hole. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Upon pulling out of the hole to inspect the whipstock assembly, it was discovered that two (2) test plug O-rings 
snagged around the whipstock assembly and mill. It is believed the O-rings could have caused enough drag 
while tripping in the hole to collapse and cock the jars. The jars in use were the bumper type and are much 
easier to activate than normal drilling jars. With the jars cocked there was sufficient weight below the jars to 
enable the jars to fire. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Discuss incident with drill crews and identify risks associated with the use of jars.  
2.  Revise relevant JSAs to consider the use of jars and the associated risks.  
3.  Drag while tripping must be monitored to ensure jars are not inadvertently cocked.  Any debris in the well 

(O-rings, tong dies, etc.) or tight hole could result in the jars cocking and firing unexpectedly. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2004 

