Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 38  
 

DROPPED OBJECT RELATED INCIDENTS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently three dropped objects incidents have occurred.  First, while picking up 5-1/2-inch tubing and transferring it from 
the V-door to the Mouse Hole, a joint of tubing was caught under the Top Drive.  The tubing joint fell and knocked the 
hardhat  from  an  employee.    In  the  second  incident,  while  pulling  a  joint  of  9-5/8”  casing  from  the  catwalk,  the  casing 
struck  the  top  of  the  V-door,  causing  a  shackle  to  fail.    In  the  third,  while  disconnecting  a  cement  hose  from  the 
cementing head, a sledgehammer fell 35 feet to the rig floor.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
In the first incident, while slacking off to latch the elevators onto the joint in the mouse hole, the rigging equipment on the 
joint  tubing  being  moved  caught  under  the  traveling  equipment,  causing  the  joint  of  tubing  to  drop.    In  the  second 
incident, the shackle got caught up on the peak of the V-door, causing it to break.  In the third incident, the lanyard was 
tied around the handle of the hammer, which is not a sufficient method to prevent the hammer slipping out of the rope 
and falling, to the rig floor.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address these incidents, this company did the following:   
 
Incident 1 Instructed Rig Personnel to do the following:   
 
1.  Review the procedures for moving casing and tubulars from the V-door to the rig floor.  Ensure planned procedure 
matches  requirements  in  the  company’s  tubular  handling  policy.    The  procedures  must  include  eliminating  or 
reducing hazards and keeping risks to a minimum. 

2.  Develop a JSA that includes the rigging of equipment and the positions of people during the operation.   
3.  Operations  involving  use  of  hoisting  devices  to  move  any  large  equipment  must  have  a  JSA  and  possibly  a  Risk 
Assessment.  Operations involving people in close vicinity of equipment must ensure the method involves as little 
contact with the equipment as possible. 

 
Incident 2  Instructed Rig Personnel to do the following: 
 
1.  Review current rig procedures to ensure rigging equipment is correctly assembled and in line with any appropriate 

company procedures. 

2.  Review JSA to ensure it includes any possibility of falling objects or equipment hanging up. 
3.  Ensure all areas where equipment passes during lifting are clear, and any obstruction that may cause the possibility 

of something catching, being damaged or dropping is removed. 

 
Incident 3 Instructed Rig Personnel to do the following:    
 
1.  Ensure that all personnel involved in work requiring them to be raised in a riding belt or to work at height are familiar 

2. 

with the associated company personnel hoisting policies. 
Immediately inspect all hand tools and equipment to ensure a sufficient method of adequately securing the lanyard 
to the tool without being wrapped or improperly tied. 

3.  Ensure  a  pre-job  meeting  is  held  before  all  personnel  hoisting  operations  including  discussion  of  the  appropriate 
JSA,  hoisting  procedure  reviewed,  and  that  all  equipment  and  tools  are  inspected  by  the  Driller  or  another 
Supervisor. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2002 

