Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 23 
 

CRANE OPERATIONS – DROPPED DOG HOUSE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A crew was rigging down a dog house with a 100 ton crane that was subcontracted for the move.  After they 
had  removed  two  pins  from  the  sub  floor  of  the  doghouse  and  the  third  one  was  in  the  process  of  being 
removed,  the  Crane  Operator  decided  he  wanted  to  change  out  the  slings.    Without  any  warning  or 
authorization,  the  Operator  loosened  the  slings  that  sustained  the  dog  house  on  the  right  side.    When  the 
third pin was removed the dog house fell.  No one was injured but the equipment was damaged. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The Crane Operator used poor judgment when he loosened the rigging slings without any warning.  There 
was  a  lack  of  supervision  of  the  Crane  Crew  toward  the  job  being  performed.    A  thorough  JSA  was  not 
performed on the rigging down of the dog house by the Crane Crew. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Third party operator training must be verified before allowing them to conduct work. 
•  Reinforce to all personnel involved during a heavy lift the hazards associated the planned operations and 

conduct a thorough JSA. 

•  Evaluate subcontractor (Crane operator, Signalman) qualifications 
•  Clear communications must always take place between the Signalman and the Crane Operator 
•  Clear  communications  between  the  field  and  the  area  office  must  occur  at  the  beginning  of  every  rig 

move. 

•  Closer supervision of tasks involving both company and third party personnel. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2007 

 

