Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 22 
 

INJURY RESULTS FROM 

WORKING ON PRESSURIZED EQUIPMENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An air line from an air compressor to the air tank was leaking.  The driller decided to tighten the hammer 
union which was under pressure with a sledge hammer.  When the 1” union was struck the air line broke 
striking the employee on the leg. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The employee failed to follow proper Lockout/Tagout procedures.   
2.  The employee failed to use the proper tool for the task. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Make sure all employees are aware of potential dangers when working on any pressurized equipment 

and the correct way to release trapped pressure.   

2.  Before working on any kind of pressurized hose or line make sure the pressure is reduced to zero and 

the equipment is locked and tagged out. 

3.  Be sure to use the proper size tool for the job.  A smaller hammer would have been more appropriate for 

the task. 

4.  Rig managers are to ensure that this Safety Alert is reviewed with each crew member.  A pre-tour safety 

meeting is a good opportunity to conduct and document the review.  Post this Safety Alert in the top 
doghouse. 

 
 
IADC  Note:    See  IADC  Alert  99-13.    Also,  note  the  following  from  the  IADC  HSE  Reference  Guide:  
“Employees  should  not  attempt  to  tighten  or  loosen  unions  or  other  connections  under  pressure.    Never 
hammer on a pipe or connection that is under pressure.”   
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2008 

