Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT - DERRICKBOARD SLIDE BAR INCIDENT 

 
ALERT 06 – 33 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

After  laying  down  drill  collars,  the  Derrickman  positioned  the  Slide  Bar  across  the  derrickboard  “alleyway” 
and came down to the rig floor.  The rig crew and casing crew were rigging up to run casing.  While using the 
rig floor hoist to pull the casing slips up the V-door, the Slide Bar fell from the derrickboard and hit the lay 
down stanchion (pole) in the mouse-hole.  The Slide Bar ricocheted off the stanchion and struck a member of 
the casing crew in the back of the head, then struck the Assistant Driller in the left calf. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Several  days  earlier,  the  Slide  Bar  could  not  be  retracted  into  its  storage  position  and  upon  inspection,  it 
was found to be bent.  Due to safety concerns of attempting full repairs while the derrick was up, a decision 
was  made  to  repair  it  temporarily  and  follow  up  with  a  permanent  fix  at  the  next  rig  move.    Temporary 
repairs  consisted  of  cutting  approximately  8”  off  the  length  of  the  Bar  to  allow  it  to  retract  fully  and  then 
affixing a bolt with double nuts to prevent the shortened bar from working all the way out when extended.  

Afterward, the Rig Manager attempted to inform the Superintendent about the change but due to different 
vocabularies, the message was misunderstood (the Rig Manager stated the “toe board” needed to be fixed 
when it was really the Slide Bar that had been modified).   Subsequently, crew change occurred and neither 
the oncoming Rig Manager nor Derrickman was made aware of the change.   

After  working  the  derrick  that  day,  the  Derrickman  slid  the  Bar  out  of  its  retracted  position  but  didn’t 
recognize the new double-nutted bolt and didn’t understand why it was there so he removed the bolt and 
slid the Bar on across the alleyway prior to coming down from the derrick. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1)  Conduct Engineering design review and rebuild the Slide Bar assembly at next rig move. 
2)  Revise the JSA for working derricks to specify the proper configuration and positioning of the Slide Bar. 
3) 
4)  Distribute Safety Alert. 
 

Improve Rig Manager Communication through the use of handover notes. 

Photo 1 – Slide Bar after falling to rig floor 

 

Photo 2 – Area of derrickboard from where Slide Bar 
fell 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2006 

