Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 12  
 

CLIMBING ON EQUIPMENT RESULTS IN DISLOCATED SHOULDER  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Deck  Coordinator  (Supervisor)  dislocated  shoulder  while  climbing  down  from  a  third  party  filter  press.    The 
operation was to offload a two-section filter press from the workboat and to stack-up the filter press on the rig.  
After the base of the filter press was landed on the rig, two Roustabouts put on their fall protection equipment 
and climbed seven (7) feet to the top of the filter press to pin the fold-down handrails in place.  The handrails 
had to be erected before the top section could be landed on the base.  One Roustabout climbed down from 
the aft end of the unit using the rungs of the protective cage, while the Deck Coordinator climbed down from 
the  unit  using  the  filter  support  beams.    When  the  Deck  Coordinator  stepped  on  the  sub-rack,  which  was 
approximately two (2) feet from the deck, his foot slipped. As he fell backwards he grabbed the filter support 
beam to arrest the fall and dislocated his shoulder. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Deck Coordinator did not utilize a ladder while climbing down off of the filter press base unit.   
•  Deck Coordinator did not recognize the risks of climbing on support beams. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following Directives: 
 
1.  Ladders must be used to gain access to and from equipment. If equipment is not designed with ladders 

then portable ladders will be used. 

2.  Simultaneous operations must be managed as two or more separate operations. When possible, one task 
must be completed prior to the start of the next task, especially when the same crew is working both tasks.  
3.  When  managing  simultaneous  operations,  a  JSA  must  be  reviewed  for  each  task,  since  each  task 

possesses its own hazards and each hazard must be managed separately.  

4.  Check to ensure newly arriving equipment can safely be accessed; if not use portable ladders.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued March 2004 

