Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 13 
 

DROPPED CRANE BLOCK HOOK LATCH 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The deck crew was changing out cutting skips.  A 
full skip had just been landed and unhooked from 
the  whip  line  of  the  starboard  crane.    As  the 
crane was booming into position for the next lift, 
the J-latch (Fig.1) from the main block’s hook fell 
approximately  40  meters  and  landed  on  top  of 
the  cuttings  skid,  then  bounced  between  two 
employees  and  came  to  rest  on  the  main  deck.  
No  injuries  or  other  damage  occurred.    The 
incident  was  designated  “High  Potential”  for 
severe injury. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The main block hook J-latch came in contact with the crane boom.   The boom saver (protector) pad was not 
in the correct position on the boom to prevent metal-to-metal contact between main block and the boom (see 
Fig 2). 
 

Fig.1  

 

Boom saver pad to protect 
boom. Pad was out of place  

Main block 
and hook  

Point of impact.  

Fig. 2 showing the approximate point of impact on 
the boom by the block and the incorrect position of 
the boom saver pad.  
 
 (This diagram is not to scale and does not 
reflect the position of the whip line or boom 
during the incident and is used only to illustrate 
the impact between the main block and boom). 

The impact dislodged the circ-clips which allowed the pin to be knocked out of place which allowed the latch 
to fall (see Fig. 3 below).   
 

 

 
Fig. 3: The pin that was displaced after the circ-clips were 
dislodged when the block struck the boom.   
 
Circ-clip installs in the grooves at each end of the pin that 
retains the hook latch. 
 
It has been ascertained that the circ- clip and pin system 
used to retain the hook latch is designed for easy 
disassembly for equipment inspection and should not be 
altered.  

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Crane Operators during pre-tour inspections are to ensure the following:   

o  The anti-two block is correctly positioned so the block cannot be stopped above the boom saver. 
o  The J-latch system is intact—circ-clips are securely in place on the pin.  
o  The boom saver pad is in good condition and positioned to prevent metal-to-metal contact (see 

Fig. 4 below).  

 

Fig. 4:  The boom saver pad that did not 
prevent main block from contacting the 
boom. 

                    
 

                                    

            

•  Maintenance personnel are to ensure the J-latch system is placed on preventive maintenance plan for 
annual change-out of renewable / replaceable parts (pin and circ-clips; and main latch if required).  Have 
complete spare latch assembly on hand. 

•  Roustabouts and Crane Operators are to ensure the J-latch lock is secured before all lifts and before 
stowing the block.  This must be captured in rig procedures, JSA’s, etc. and communicated to all crews 

•  Crane operator is to conduct an immediate post-impact inspection if the block is seen to contact the 

boom or other object. Verify pin is in place with circ-clips intact.  

•  Operations managers are to notify the inspection company of this incident and ensure that the location / 

position and condition of the boom saver pad is included in future inspections.   

•  Crane operator is to operate crane in such a way to prevent excessive swinging of the main block.  
•  Maintenance personnel are to consider changing boom saver pad to wrapped nylon line, as it may be 

more effective and lighter. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2007 

