Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 03 – 18 
 

PERSONNEL HOISTING INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A Floorman was being raised into the Derrick in a man-riding belt to open the kill valve on the Flow Head. As 
he was attempting to install the valve handle, the rig heaved significantly causing the Carabiner to catch on the 
valve  handle  and  be  stretched  until  it  broke.  Although  part  of  the  primary  assembly  used  for  lifting  failed, 
serious injury was prevented because the man was attached to and saved by the secondary fall protection. 
 

 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  valve  handle  was  protruding  out  beyond  the  assembly  frame  and  not  recognized  as  a  hazard  by  the 
involved employee or in the JSA. The degree of heave was also not taken into consideration. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this  incident, this company  issued  the following  Action Items to 
their rig personnel:   

 

•  Review any relevant JSA  to ensure it includes the  possibility of anything  being  snagged or caught  while 
raising personnel. Also, the JSA should take “heave” into account, to the extent possible, when describing 
potential risk. 

•  To reduce the possibility of snagging or catching, ensure the correct size Carabiner has been selected and 
identified in the JSA. (Regardless of size, all approved Carabiners are rated for a minimum 5,000 lb. load). 
•  Order Carabiners from the company’s approved Safety Equipment list which identifies the various sizes by 

•  When  the  hazard  cannot  be  eliminated,  devise  a  method  such  as  covering  or  taping  the  Carabiner  or 

•  Ensure  secondary  fall  protection  is  included  in  the  JSA  to  allow  minimum  drop  distance  if  the  initial  fall 

individual part numbers. 

shackle to prevent it from catching. 

protection is lost. 

 
Note:  Refer to IADC Alerts:  01-02, 01-03, 01-16, 02-23, 02-32, 02-54, and Section 19 of the IADC Accident 
Prevention Reference Guide.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued April 2003 

