Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

ALERT 03 – 21

WHAT HAPPENED: 

MOVEMENT OF MATERIAL RESULTS 

IN DROPPED GAS BOTTLE 

The operation was moving all equipment off the main deck in preparation for a rig move.  The crane was being 
used  to  move  an  oxygen  &  acetylene  bottle  rack from  the  starboard  side  of  the  main  deck  to  the  pipe  rack.  
The Crane Operator was flagged by a Roustabout to pick up the bottle rack.  When the load was high enough 
for the Crane Operator to have a visual, the Roustabout stopped flagging and began to move to the landing 
site.  The Crane Operator began to swing the load but the load was not high enough to clear one of the pipe 
rack posts.  The bottle rack struck the post in such a way that the door bar on the oxygen side of the rack was 
knocked  open  and  several  bottles  fell  out  of  the  rack  onto  the  main  deck.    Valves  were  broken  off  2  of  the 
bottles but fortunately the bottles were empty.  No one was injured but clearly, had the bottles not been empty, 
this incident would have been catastrophic. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Improper securing of the bolt by a crows foot safety keeper. 

• 
•  Lack of complete communication, signalman-leaving position too soon. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   

•  Use  nuts  and  washers  to  secure  bolts  instead  of  crows  foot  safety  keepers.  Make  a  survey  of  all  bottle 

racks on your rig to ensure no unsafe conditions exist.   

•  Modify  JSAs  for  crane  operations  so  that  signalmen  are  reminded  to  remain  in  communication  with  the 

Crane Operator throughout the lift.   

IADC Note:  Refer to Safety alerts 01-31 and 02-18 for additional information. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2003

