Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 05 – 39 
 

HEALTH ISSUE - SOFT TISSUE INFECTIONS (MRSA) 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) is a staph skin infection that has been experienced on 
some  rigs  within  our  fleet.    This  bulletin  has  been  developed  from  information  provided  by  our  company 
doctor,  medical  director  and  company  medical  consultant.    We  all  need  to  be  informed  on  how  to  identify, 
treat, prevent and control the spread of this particular  type of staph infection so that it does not become a 
problem on your rig. 
 
BACKGROUND: 
 
What  is  a  staph  infection?    Staphylococcus  aureus  also  called  staph,  are  bacteria  commonly  found  on 
human skin; common places include inside of nose, in the armpit, groin, and genital area. When bacteria are 
found on the skin but do not cause illness it is called “colonization.”  When the bacteria do cause illness the 
person is said to be “infected” with staph. In most cases, staph either does not cause any problems or cause 
minor skin infections, such as pimples or boils.  In some cases, staph can cause more serious infections.  
 
What  is  MRSA?    Some  staph  bacteria  are  resistant  to  certain  antibiotics.    Methicillin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) is resistant to the antibiotic methicillin and other antibiotics. 
 
What are the symptoms?  Employees who are colonized with staph or MRSA do not have any symptoms. 
Staph skin infections often begin with a skin defect allowing the bacteria to enter the skin and develop into an 
infection.  Symptoms include: 
•  Redness, warmth, swelling, tenderness of the skin, and boils or blisters. 
•  Staph infections are sometimes mistaken for spider bites. 
•  Some people may also have fever and chills. 
 
How  do  MRSA  spread?    Staph  infections  including  MRSA  are  spread  by  close  contact  with  infected 
employees/persons.  Staph  can  come  off  of  skin  onto  the  skin  of  another  employee  during  skin-to-skin 
contact. Staph can also come off of infected skin onto shared object and surfaces and get onto the skin of 
the employee/person who uses the object or surface next.  The wound drainage and pus is very infectious. 
Examples  of  shared  objects  that  might  spread  staph  include  personal  hygiene  objects  (i.e.  towels,  soap, 
wound dressing, bandages, etc.) sheets, clothes, benches in dressing areas, shared areas in showers, and 
athletic equipment.  To summarize, anything that could have touched the skin of a staph-infected employee 
can carry the bacteria to the skin of another employee. 
 
Who is most at risk for MRSA infection? MRSA infections are more common among employees who have 
the following risk factors: 
•  Recurrent skin diseases or open wounds 
•  Long term illness 
•  Been a patient in the hospital or other health care facility within the past year 
•  Contact with other persons with MRSA infection 
•  Recent antibiotic use 
•  Live in crowded settings 
• 
 
 
 

Immunocompromised (HIV, transplant patients) 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 
How is MRSA diagnosed? A culture of the infected area can be taken and sent to the laboratory. A culture 
of the infected skin is especially useful in recurrent, persistent, or severe infections and in cases of antibiotic 
failure. 
 
How is MRSA treated? Most MRSA infections can be treated with proper wound and skin care and by using 
antibiotics active against MRSA. I&D (called incision and drainage) may be necessary to drain pus from the 
infected area. Some MRSA infections can be difficult to treat and can progress to serious and possibly life 
threatening  infections.  Serious  MRSA  infections  may  require  intravenous  antibiotic  treatment.  Employees 
who are colonized but not infected with MRSA do not usually need to be treated. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following guidelines: 
 
Lesson Learned # 1: How can I protect myself from becoming infected with staph?  
1.  Keep  your  hands  clean by  washing  thoroughly  with  soap  and  water.  Cover  and  rub  all surfaces  of  the 

hands. Lather and rub for at least 10 seconds.  

2.  Keep cuts and abrasions clean and covered with a clean bandage until healed.  
3.  Avoid contact with other employees’ wounds or material and surfaces contaminated from wounds.   
4.  Avoid skin-to-skin contact with employees who have skin infections.  
5.  Do  not  share  personal  items  (i.e.,  towels,  washcloth,  razor,  soap,  clothing,  or  uniforms)  with  other 

6.  Utilize a disinfectant cleaner to clean objects and surfaces that are shared with other employees, such as 

employees.  

athletic equipment, before you use them. 

Lesson Learned # 2: If I have an MRSA or staph infection, how can I keep from spreading it to others?  
1.  Keep infections covered with clean, dry bandages.    
2.  Wash hands after touching infected skin and bandages.  
3.  Put  disposable  wastes  (e.g.,  dressing,  bandages)  in  a  separate  trash  bag  and  close  the  bag  tightly 

before throwing it out with the regular garbage.   

4.  Medics  should  use  gloves,  and  wash  hands  afterwards,  if  they  change  your  bandages  or  touch  the 

infected wound or other objects that have been in contact with the wound or wound drainage. 

Lesson Learned # 3:  
1.  Do not share personal items as mentioned previously.   
2.  Wash linens and clothes that become soiled with hot water and laundry detergent.   
3.  Dry clothes in a hot dryer.   
4.  Wash utensils and dishes in the usual manner with soap and hot water or use a standard dishwasher.  

Avoid skin-to-skin contact until your infection is healed.   
If you have a MRSA infection, be sure to tell the medic who treats you that you have this infection. 

5. 
Lesson Learned # 4: What should I do if I think I have a staph infection?  If you think you might have 
a  staph  infection,  consult  your  medic  immediately.    Early  treatment  can  help  prevent  the  infection 
from getting worse.  
 
Action Items:  To address this issue the company issued the following action items:  
 
1.  Toolpusher, Offshore Installation Manager (OIM) / Person In Charge (PIC): 

a.  Present this bulletin as soon as possible or during the next Weekly Safety Meeting. 
b.  Ensure this bulletin is posted on the rig’s Communication Board. 
c.  Ensure personnel assigned to your area of responsibility are given the opportunity to understand the 

lessons learned from this bulletin. 

d.  Ensure rig based Rig Medics / Medical Officers are familiar with this bulletin. 

2.  Department Heads: 

a.  Post this bulletin on the office’s Communication Board. 
b.  Ensure personnel are given the opportunity to understand the lessons learned from this bulletin. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2005 

