Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

HIGH POTENTIAL INCIDENT – DROPPED LIGHT 

 
ALERT 09 – 25 
 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A 23 lb spotlight fell 90 feet (27.5 m) from a crane boom to 
the  rig  deck.    The  operation  at  the  time  was  slewing  the 
bow  crane  to  over  the  chemical  hatch  from  its  stowed 
position at the forward leg.  Having visually confirmed that 
the hook would not catch on any equipment on the radio 
room  roof,  the  crane  operator  started  to  slew  the  crane 
toward the accommodation.  As he did so the light fell to 
the deck beside the blue container pictured below.  It then 
bounced  and  struck  the  wall  of  the  radio  room  before 
coming to rest in the position shown.  No one was in the 
area at the time of the incident. 
 

Light fell from above here 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2009 

 

 

6. 
 
 
 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Entrance to heli-admin office 

TYCO H2S container 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The  secondary  retention  wire  was  not 
properly attached to the light.  Therefore it 
did not retain the falling light.  

2.  The  vibration  mounting  was  not  as  per 

original OEM recommendation. 

3.  The  crane  lights  are  not  included  in  any 
inspection  or  Dropped 

maintenance, 
Object Survey. 

 

 

Bolt on base of light 
bracket  

1M of cable 
detached  
from here 

Safety sling ‘as 
found’ 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  A Review of SAP/ Tour Inspection / Crane reports is to include crane lights and retention. 
2.  DROPS inspection to include the rest of the Rig, i.e. cranes, not just derrick. 
3.  All repairs must have OIM and/or Engineering Approval. 
4.  The crane manufacturer was asked to review the lighting arrangements for cranes and provide recommendations. 
5. 

Instructed rig and maintenance personnel that all secondary retention cables on potential dropped objects are to 
be checked for correct attachment, length and corrosion. 
If light fittings are not required, remove them.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2009 

