Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 28 
 

NEAR MISS – DAMAGED MAN-RIDING WINCH 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The drilling crew was running 18 5/8”casing.  While preparing for a personnel hoisting operation a floorman 
was  checking  out  the  man-riding  winch  when  he  noticed  that  it  was  not  working  properly.    A  test  was 
conducted by the mechanic who discovered that the winch drum did not rotate with the control lever in the 
lower  personnel  position.    The  man-riding  winch  was  immediately  removed  from  the  rig  floor  to  repair  and 
replace damaged mechanical parts. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Damaged mechanical parts due to wear and tear.  
2.  Probable cause was due to improper use of man-riding winch by holding down emergency brake while 

on rotation.  

3.  Personnel who operated the man-riding winch had not been properly trained in its use.   
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Rig supervisors were instructed to discuss this incident during safety meetings. 
2.  Rig supervisors instructed rig personnel that equipment should be maintained in good working condition 

at all times through regular maintenance and inspection. 

3.  Rig personnel were instructed that inspection deficiencies are to be entered in the “Rig Corrective Action 

Register”. 

4.  Line  managers  were  instructed  that  they  should  ensure  the  competency  of  all  personnel  using 

equipment, and conduct refresher training if necessary. 

5.  The company reinforced its policy that only trained personnel are to operate man-riding winch. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2009 

