Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 35  
 

RELEASE OF PRESSURE RESULTS IN LACERATION AND SUTURES 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  pressure  testing  the  Choke  Manifold  up  to  15,000psi  the  Assistant  Driller  noticed  a  leak  at  the  test 
hose at approximately 9,000psi and asked the Motorman to repair the leak.  First the Assistant Driller opened 
the bleed valve at the test pump and then he went directly to the Choke Manifold so that he could bleed off 
the volume in the line to the trip tank.  While the Assistant Driller was still opening the valve the Motorman 
disconnected the quick release couplings at the choke causing the escape water pressure to lacerate the left 
palm at the base of the thumb.  The laceration required four sutures. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  A previous leak had been observed during a test at 15000psi 10 minutes prior to this incident.  On that 
occasion the Motorman took approximately 10 minutes to report to the work site allowing sufficient time 
for the whole system to bleed off and the repairs completed without incident. 

•  Both  the  Assistant  Driller  and  the  Motorman  were  experienced  and  had  conducted  tests  and/or 

maintained or repaired the lines and associated equipment on many occasions. 

•  The double skinned ½ inch HP line from the Test Pump to the Choke Manifold was rated to 20,000psi 

working pressure.  The actual diameter for pressure release was approximately ¼ inch. 

•  There was no communications between the Assistant Driller and the Motorman when to disconnect the 

HP line. 

•  A permit to work was in place. 
•  There was no written procedure, JSA or equivalent for this task. 
•  A pre-job meeting was conducted prior to pressure testing. 
•  There was no additional job meeting or step back conducted when the conditions of the job changed i.e. 

the need to bleed off pressure because of the leak observed. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  The following learning’s/corrective actions have been identified: 
 
•  Lack of Supervision.  All Supervisors as part of their position are obligated to ensure that those working 

under their supervision are fully aware of their responsibilities in the task at hand  

•  Planning.    Planning  isn’t  just  about  the  start  to  the  end.    It  includes  what  might,  could  or  can  happen 
between  those  two  points.    When  there  is  a  change  during  a  job  or  process  we  need  to  reassess  our 
planning to ensure the change is controlled and any new steps or hazards are identified. 

•  Complacency.    This  job  has  been  performed  on  many  occasions  without  injury.  In  this  case  the 
pressure had not been fully released.  Evidence that the pressure system has been fully depressurized 
must be checked i.e. ALL pressure gauges are to indicate zero with zero fluid release before dismantling 
or starting any work pressure equipment. 

•  Lack of Policy and Procedures. No documented procedures.  Rig to develop a procedure and/or JSA 
on Working with Pressure and associated hazards. Standards to be agreed on the requirements during 
pressure testing i.e. barrier tape, signage. 

•  Education.  Rig  Managers  are  to  educate  all  personnel  on  the  need  to  step  back  for  all  jobs  and  any 

change to the job.  

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2006 

