Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 28 
 

EMPLOYEE’S ARM FRACTURED WHILE USING PULL BACK ROPE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was tripping out of the hole. The derrick man had wrapped the pull back rope around his arm to 
assist with pulling the drill collar back. The derrick man lost control of the collar and was unable to release 
the rope secured around his arm.  His arm was pulled around the drill collar and severely fractured in several 
places. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The board communication system was not functional at the time of the incident and there was no verbal 

communication between the derrickman and the driller. 

 

• 

•  The driller and other employees on the rig floor were apparently not aware of the derrickman’s activities. 
•  The derrickman had the pull back rope wrapped around his arm and could not release it.  
• 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 

Instructed the Rig Managers to ensure that the communication systems should be maintained in proper 
working order. 
Instructed rig personnel that the pull back rope should never be secured around the hand, arm or other 
part of the body. 
Instructed employees working on the rig floor during trips or any time personnel are in the derrick that 
they should assist the driller in monitoring the derrickman’s activities.  
Instructed rig personnel to never stand on or in a coil of rope or line which is moving.  These hazards are 
present while operating the cathead line and during rig up operations. 
Instructed rig personnel that under no circumstances shall a person wrap ANY rope, wire line or cable 
around their hand, arm or other body part. 
Instructed derrickmen that they shall use the mule line or pull back hoist whenever practical to limit the 
use of the pull back rope.   

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  Employees were instructed of other potential activities where this type injury could occur such as holding 

a tag line.  Being unable to release the tag line could pull a person off a platform or into harms way. 

 
(IADC Note:  check IADC Alert 08-24) 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2008 

