Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 21  

SLIP & TRIP RESULTS IN MTO 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A company Team Leader was visiting the project site.  After viewing the Texas Deck in the fabrication area, 
the  injured  person  (IP)  was  stepping  off  of  the  raised  support  that  the  structure  was  sitting  on  and  was 
attempting to step on the flange of a large beam laying on its side about two feet (0.61 meters) away.  His 
footing  slipped  and  he  fell  onto  the  beam,  face  down,  landing  on  both  flanges.    His  left  arm/wrist/hand 
struck  one  flange while  his  left  thigh  struck  the  other  flange.    In addition,  it knocked  the wind  out of  him.  
Other  than  some  obvious  soreness,  there  was  no  indication  of  injury.    A  couple  of  hours  later  there  was 
some  swelling  and  redness  near  the  knuckle  of  the  left  index  finger  and  a  trip  to  the  clinic  was  made, 
whereby an ice-pack and tensor bandage was applied.  Upon arriving home his wrist was still tender, so he 
made a visit to the doctor and it was discovered that he had received a minor fracture to a bone in his wrist.  

 

Insufficient range of sizes available for PPE (boots) available for visitors at main office. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Lack of attention while walking through a construction area. 
 
  Failure to communicate with main stores if additional stock was available.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed their employees in the 
following: 
 
  Do  not  step  over  a  gap  onto  an  irregular  walking  surface,  especially  if  there  is  nothing  available  to 

steady yourself, such as a handrail. Step down off of one level before stepping up onto another. 

  Constantly  assess  your  personal  positioning  when  walking  through,  or  between,  project  assemblies 

and materials.  Make sure of your footing before you commit yourself. 
If properly sized PPE is not available, in this case safety boots, then do not proceed out to the worksite 
until adequate protection can be obtained.   

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2009 

