Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 26  
 

GLOVED HAND CAUGHT IN PIPE SPINNER RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew  was  utilizing a  lay  down machine to  pick up 4” (10cm) drill  pipe.   During this operation, the floor 
man was assisting the crew by pulling the pipe spinners onto the joint of drill pipe.  As he pulled the spinner 
toward  the  drill  pipe  with  his  left  hand,  he  placed  his  right  hand  onto  the  joint  of  drill  pipe  to  get  more 
leverage.    As  the  pipe  spinners  were  latched  onto  the  joint  of  drill  pipe  and  engaged,  his  right  hand  glove 
became  entangled  in  the  pipe  spinner  chain.    His  right  hand  was  pulled  into  the  jaws  of  the  pipe  spinner 
resulting  in  multiple  fractures  to  his  right  middle  finger.    Quick  actions  by  the  crew  prevented  this  incident 
from being more serious. 
 

Correct Hand Placement 

Incorrect Hand Placement 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The employee did not realize that he had placed his hand into a pinch point area on the drill pipe. 
•  The crew did  not recognize and correct the hazard that  was created by the floor man’s improper hand 

 

 

•  The pipe spinner was not equipped with a tagline which is supposed to keep the employee’s hands in a 

safe position when pulling the spinner toward the joint of drill pipe. 

•  The JSA did address these concerns; however, the employee still inadvertently placed his hand on the 

placement.  

drill pipe. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The rig managers and supervisors were instructed to remind their employees to recognize and keep their 

hands and fingers out of pinch points. 

•  All personnel were reminded that they must always be on watch for hazards and perform stop task / stop 
work  when  a  hazard  is  recognized  (prior  or  during  an  operation).    Once  the  hazard  is  eliminated  / 
controlled, then operations may resume. 

•  Rig  managers  and  supervisors must  ensure  that  all  pipe  spinners  are  equipped  with  taglines  and  they 
must monitor their employees performing the task to verify that the tag lines are being used as intended.   
•  Floor  hands  were  reminded  that  their  hands  must  be  kept  in  a  safe  position  when  pulling  the  spinner 

toward the joint of drill pipe and while securing the spinners back toward the derrick A-Leg. 

•  The supervisors were reminded that they are to monitor their employees to make sure that the JSA steps 

are followed. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2012 

