Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

ALERT 04 – 25 
 

FATAL ACCIDENT INVOLVING A FORKLIFT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A storage rack weighing 3.8 tons was moved close to the welder’s workshop and placed on its side for repair.  
The move and placing it on its side was for ease of repair and to avoid blocking traffic.  A number of workers, 
including the deceased, were standing between the storage rack and the workshop container.  A roustabout 
took  a  forklift  truck  to  get  some  gas  cylinders,  which  were  located  close  to  the  storage  rack.  While 
maneuvering, the forklift hit the rack, which toppled over.  The rack struck the deceased as it fell causing injury 
to his abdomen and trapped his foot underneath.  Despite prompt medical treatment and medevac by plane he 
died from internal hemorrhage 3 hours later. 
 
The photo below shows the work situation. 
 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Immediate causes were:  Placing the storage rack in a vertical, less stable, position without securing it (the 
rack was previously secured to a heavy load but this was removed when the rack was moved).  Using a large 
forklift truck with limited visibility, not adapted for this type of lifting.  No dedicated and trained personnel 
available to drive the forklift.  Maneuvering the forklift in close proximity to the rack.  The deceased had worked 
for the drilling contractor for 3.5 months and lacked safety awareness. 
 
Underlying  Causes  were:    Organization  of  work  on  site  was  not  properly  controlled  resulting  in  the 
positioning of the rack, gas cylinders and workers created a potentially dangerous situation.  In addition there 
was a lack of safety awareness, particularly non-perception of the risks of having the rack in vertical position.  
Qualification, training and experience of personnel was deficient.   
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2004 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to rig 
personnel: 
 
Safety Culture   
 
•  Ensure that there is a HSE advisor on-site and he has enough authority and back-up to work effectively. 
•  Enforce the Permit to Work system on-site.  Define what work does / does not need a Permit. Regular 

audits by the Company Man / Site Representative should be performed. 

•  Promote the use of Unsafe Act / Situation Reporting. Training, audits and incentives can be used to 

achieve this. 

•  Promote a Risk Analysis culture at all levels of the Affiliate. 
•  Ensure support services – like welders – are involved in daily meetings. 
•  The Company Man / Site Representative should participate in Pre-Job Safety Meetings. 
•  Adopt a “Green Hat” policy for new workers / visitors to operational sites. 
 
Training  
 
•  Ensure that forklift trucks are operated only by dedicated, trained, and qualified drivers.   
•  Also, implement the HSE training matrix requirement for all personnel on site including Contractor 

personnel.   

•  Permit to Work and Risk Analysis training is essential. 
 
Supervision   
•  Safe supervision of work is critical. Even “routine” work creates hazards that must be controlled by trained 

and aware supervisors.   

•  Daily site inspections should be performed and include checks for unstable equipment. 
 
Facilities and Equipment   
 
•  Separate welding / mechanical work zones from storage areas.   
•  Ensure such zones are clearly marked.   
•  Forklift trucks should be of a suitable size / capacity for the tasks involved. Strict procedures should be 

applied to control the use of larger (eg 12 T) forklifts. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2004 

