Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 30 
 

MTO—STRUCK BY THE TONGS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The drill crew had made up a joint of 6-5/8” drill pipe.  They then attempted to torque the connection using 
the  bottom  tong  to  apply  the  torque  and  the  top  tong  was  used  for  backup.    The  bottom  tong  was  placed 
improperly and was biting on the hard banding.  At about 5,000-ft. lbs. of torque, the bottom tong broke loose 
from its bite and struck the employee on his left thigh.  This resulted in a medical treatment case.   

5. 

6. 
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Several things standout in this incident:  

1.  The tongs were allowed to be placed on the hard banding.  
2.  The employee was standing in a danger zone (swing path of the tong) while the tong was being pulled 

on. 

3.  The drill crew members participating in the procedure did not speak up to stop the job.  
4.  The concept of spotting and addressing unsafe acts is a basic element of using the rig’s behavior based 

safety awareness program.   
It was determined that rig crews need additional training on when and how to address a situation where 
someone is committing an unsafe act.   
It was also discovered that the drill crew needed training on the proper placement of tongs. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company advised the rig crews in the 
following: 
 
1.  Even the jobs that seem ordinary or simple need personnel to be alert.  
2.  Supervisors should never assume that everyone is standing where they should be.  
3.  Drill crew personnel were instructed to LOOK to see each time.  When procedures are followed we can 

prevent incidents.  

4.  There  are  systems  in  place  to  prevent  exposure  to  hazards,  and  a  key  system  is  the  company’s 
behavior-based safety program.  Rig personnel using the right procedures and applying the concept of 
observations “people talking with people” would have prevented this incident.   

Message:   

We all can recall situations where we thought to ourselves, “if I had only said something.”  When you 
observe  a  potential  for  uncontrolled  releases  of  energy,  speak  up!      Everyone  has  the  ability  and 
responsibility to stop the job when a hazard is spotted.    

 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  See IADC Alert:  03 – 03 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2009 

