Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 28  
 

SLING PARTED AND DROPPED DRILL PIPE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An employee was struck in the head by 5” drill pipe when the lifting sling parted.  This resulted in sutures to 
the forehead and a severe sprain to the ankle.  The crew was picking up and racking back 5” drill pipe.  The 
roustabout crew positioned six joints of 5” drill pipe on 4” x 4” boards onto the catwalk.  The roustabout crew 
attached the lifting caps into the six joint of pipe and the Deck Coordinator signaled the drill floor flagger to 
hoist the six joints of drill pipe.  As the dill pipe was being hoisted up the V-door, the pin end of a single joint 
of drill pipe rolled off the catwalk and became wedged between the pipe rack stanchion and catwalk.  The 
Deck Coordinator signaled the rig floor to STOP; which they did.  The remaining (5) joints of pipe slid forward 
towards  the  V-door,  which  placed  excessive  tension  on  the  sling  that  was  secured  to  the  wedged  joint  of 
pipe. This added tension parted the sling.  The injured roustabout was positioning himself at the bottom of 
the  V-Door  to  insert  the  pipe  stop.    The  joint  of  drill  pipe  fell  down  the  side  of  the  V-Door  and  struck  the 
employee in the head.  This incident resulted in a Restricted Day Case, but the potential for greater injury 
was high. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  On occasion the drill pipe would roll off the catwalk and become lodged between the stanchion and the 
catwalk.  The rig crewmen had identified the hazard, but failed to correct it, or identify/control the hazard 
in the JSA. 

2.  The air hoist operator was unable to see the drill pipe (load) as it was being raised up the V-door.  This 

was due to the location of the air hoist chosen on the rig floor for this operation. 

3.  The injured employee had his back to the load as it was being raised, conducting normal duties.  He felt 

the area next to the V-door was a safe zone.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  Review  picking  up  tubular  procedures  and  JSAs  on  your  rig.  Hazards  should  be  identified  and  first 
engineered out. If the hazard can not be removed, then the JSAs must be updated to include the hazard 
and list mitigating actions. 

•  Revise JSA to define safe zone, and include as a safety warning not to turn your back to the load until 

the load is secured or completely out of harms way. 

•  At the next safety meeting, educate the crews on eliminating hazards instead of working around them or 

•  Review air hoist operator position for picking up tubulars to ensure a direct line of sight from operator to 

accepting a hazard as “part of the job”. 

load.  This may require:  

1.  Enlarging windows in wind wall  
2.  Relocating the air hoist 
3.  Adding a remote control station 
4.  or a combination of the above 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2006 

