Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 10  
 

LOSS OF BALANCE RESULTS IN LACERATION TO LEG FROM GRINDER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A vessel was on standby located near an offshore platform and waiting on orders.  While the vessel was on 
standby, an Able Seaman was ordered to brush the upper stern part of the crash-bar (starboard side) with an 
electric  grinding  machine.   He  was  attempting  to  perform  the  activity  while  working  on  the  top  of  a  ladder.  
The seaman lost  his  balance and  the control of  the grinder,  dropping  it  to  the  deck.    As  the  “uncontrolled” 
grinder fell toward the deck it cut the seaman just above the right knee.  The injured person suffered an injury 
to his right leg (just above the knee) resulting in a 5 cm (2”) cut.  After the incident, the seaman was given 
medical  assistance  from  the  vessel’s  crew  members  and  then  examined  by  the  platform  doctor.    After 
performing  his  examination,  the  doctor  recommended  sending  the  injured  person  to  an  onshore  hospital.  
The injured person was disembarked and directed to the emergency room of the local hospital for medical 
assistance. 
 

Wheel after incident 

Grinder involved 

 

 

Work area 

Ladder used 

Deck boards and partial wheel 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

Technical Findings 

  The  grinder  had  no  emergency  stop  system  in  place.    Therefore  the  grinder  continued  its  rotational 
movement  once  it  was  not  under  the  control  of  the  AB  Seaman.    This  rotation  resulted  in  cutting  the 
seafarer and the wood deck; 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2012 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Improper position to perform the activity (on top of a ladder) and ladder was not properly secured; 

 
 
  Deck space was not sufficient to perform the maintenance activity and was reported as being slippery; 
  The condition of the crash-bar and this planned activity did not justify the urgency to perform this specific 

maintenance activity during the stand-by position at an offshore platform. 

Procedural and/or Organizational Findings 

  No evidence of Planning the Activity/Toolbox Talk; 
  No evidence of Permit to Work issued (Hot work Permit/Working at Heights); 
  The  two  seafarers  working  on  deck  (AB  Seaman  and  Bosun)  were  working  independently  (not  as  per 

PTW requirements – supervisory needs); 

  No evidence of a Task Risk Assessment being performed; 
  General Risk Assessment (RA) Document/Manual was available onboard that vessel that incorporates a 

general RA sheet pertaining to surface preparation for painting. 

Human Factor Findings 

  The Able Seaman had been trained in accordance with the Safety Management System (SMS) in place 

and was competent in using of the specific tool; 

  The Captain and Crew have proper knowledge of the SMS in place and of safety law requirements; 
  No enforcement of Company rules by the crew; 
  Lack of Risk Awareness & judgment by the crew. 
Other information 

  The sea-state had been officially reported as calm.  During the investigation it was reported as long dead 
swells  resulting  in  vessel  slow  rolling,  compatible  with  unpredictable/anomalous  sea  movements.  The 
weather was recovering from the previous adverse conditions. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Conducted an inventory of the portable power tools available onboard all vessels and replaced the ones 

without an emergency stop system; 
Issued  an  instruction/circular  aimed  to  control  certain  non-urgent  maintenance  activities  on  deck  in 
particular circumstances (e.g. potential vessel instability/unpredictable movements); 

  Reinforced instruction to personnel regarding the Stop the Job Authority; 
  Reinforced  instruction  to  personnel  about  the  importance  of  Permit  To  Work,  Risk  Assessment  and 

Toolbox Talk system to identify risk so as to become aware and reduce them; 
Issued instruction/circular aimed to limit the use of electrical tools under particular circumstances and to 
reinforce the proper use of support equipment (e.g. Ladder to be secured). 

 
Preventive Actions 

  Reinforced the core of the SMS and Company Values to crewmembers and Captains; 
  Reviewed the PTW / RA and Toolbox Procedures. 

 
**IADC  Note:  Please  refer  to  the  IADC  HSE  Reference  Guide  on  Equipment  Safety  (Section  3),  Safety 
Meeting Topic Book (Hand and Power Tools) and past Safety Alerts: 01-06, 02-33, 02-36. 
 

**Credit to the Marine Safety Forum - Safety Flash 12-17 for distributing this safety alert. ** 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2012 

