Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 22 

WELDER’S FLASH (Photokeratitis) 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While welders were making modifications to the lines and collector for an additional mud tank.  A welder’s 
assistant  was  assisting  the  welder  by  holding  the  lines  and  collectors  of  the  centrifuge  pump  so  that  they 
could  be  welded  in  place.    The  helper  wasn’t  wearing  the  appropriate  PPE  (welding  shield)  instead  he 
improvised his own mask using his dark safety glasses and a piece of dark glass (obtained from a broken 
welder’s mask).  Every time the welder struck an arc, the helper would place the improvised shield in front of 
his face.  Due to the inadequate improvised shield, the worker later suffered welder’s flash (pain, sensation 
of dirt particles, photophobia, and difficulty opening eyes) in both eyes.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  Welder’s helper did not use welding shield and appropriate PPE for welding. 
  Welder didn’t stop the operation so that the proper PPE could be used. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Instructed site supervisors to:   
 

  Conduct periodic safety audits to verify that welders are following a thorough JSA. 
  Conduct a safety talk specific to safe welding operations by immediate supervision. 
  Supervision must verify a welder’s hood and shield for welding operations are being used by the 

  Encourage employees to follow operational and safety procedures by utilizing a SMART Card (Stop 

welder as well as the welder’s helper. 

Work) and routine PPE inspections. 

 

Welder’s helper holding glass from welder’s hood. 

Glass  from  welder’s  hood  used  for  viewing  the 
welding operation.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2010 

 

 

