Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 21  

NEAR MISS – LACK OF INSPECTION RESULTS IN 

DROPPED IRON ROUGHNECK 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the Iron Roughneck was extended, the cylinder shaft pulled from the clevis on the extender end of the 
cylinder.  This allowed the extender unit to fall outward onto the rig floor landing against the drill pipe stump. 
When the extender unit fell, it narrowly missed two employees.  Fortunately, no employees were directly 
between the unit and the drill pipe stump and no injuries resulted from the incident.   
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The shaft of the extender is screwed into the clevis. Inspection of the threads revealed that the threads 
had stripped and pulled from the clevis.  The threads appeared to have become galled at some point 
and the deterioration continued to weaken the contact between the clevis and shaft to the point it could 
not hold the weight (6900 lbs.) of the extender unit.  

Upon  inspection  of  the  failed  parts,  it  appeared  they  may  not  have  been  fully  tightened  against  each 
other  at  the  time  of  failure.    An  inspection  was  conducted  of  all  other  Iron  Roughnecks  in  use.  The 
inspection  revealed  that  all  shafts  and  clevises’  on  the  units  were  fully  tightened  against  each  other 
except  one.    The  extender  unit  that  had  a  space  between  the  two  parts  was  replaced  with  a  new 
cylinder,  which  comes  with  clevises  attached.    All  the  iron  roughnecks  had  been  in  service 
approximately three years. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

 

The clevis was removed from the replaced extender cylinder assembly and was taken out of service for 
inspection and galling of the threads was discovered.  This leads to the conclusion that if there is a gap 
between the shoulder of the shaft and the clevis, there is potential for failure and injury. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Prevention and Maintenance:   
 
 
 

Instructed designated company mechanics to conduct Bi-annual inspections of the extender units.     
Instructed the mechanics to train rig personnel to perform daily inspections to ensure all shafts and 
clevis’s are snug with no gap between the two and to report any variance. 

  Action:  Any variance in the condition of the extender unit shaft and clevis which is noted will result in 

replacement of entire cylinder. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2011 

