Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 38 
 

DROPPED OBJECT (CASING) 
HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was picking up 13 3/8 casing with a single joint elevator and a long pick-up assembly attached to 
the  top  drive.        The  casing  caught  on  the  derrick  A-frame  brace  /  roller.    Both  sling  links  on  the  elevators 
parted.  See picture below.  The joint slid down the V-door and came to rest at the end of the catwalk.  No 
injuries—this time. 
 

Impact 
Point  

Two slings parted. Casing falls 
down V-door and slides down 
catwalk.  

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The JSA did not point out the risk of the casing snagging the A-frame brace, although the hazard was 

verbally acknowledged at pre-tour and pre-job meetings.  

•  The lifting speed was not adjusted to allow the casing to clear the girt.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Revise the JSA to show the danger of a joint of casing being pulled too fast up the V-door and colliding 

with the top of the A-frame.  Mitigate the risk by adjusting the pick-up speed.   

•  As the joint is picked up, stop (or nearly stop) the lift before the casing enters the A-frame so there is no 

chance of it colliding with the girt.   

•  Floormen waiting on the joint--in particular the crewman with the “hold-back” rope--watch the joint and 
signal Driller to stop if the joint gets too close to the “A-frame” girt or speed is not adjusted.  Promote 
stop-job authority to avoid release of uncontrolled “killer” energy—from falling casing.    

 
LESSONS  TO  LEARN  for  personal  safety:    STAY  OUT  OF  THE  DROP  AND  SKID  ZONE  UNTIL  IT  IS 
SAFE TO ENTER.  Stay alert and always be aware that lifting equipment could fail.  Keep checking it. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2008 

