Safety Alert

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

ALERT  01-19

WHAT HAPPENED:

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

FATALITY – FALL FROM DERRICK LADDER

A fatality occurred when an employee fell from a derrick ladder while descending from the 86-foot level 
to  the  74-foot  level  after  changing  a  fluorescent  light  bulb.  The  employee  had  reached  the  last  two 
rungs  of  the  vertical  ladder  at  the  74-foot  platform  level  when  he  fell  backwards.    He  passed  through 
the space between the bottom of the safety cage and the top of the handrail, and fell to the pipe deck.

The employee lost his grip on the vertical ladder and fell backwards.  At the time he fell, he was holding 
the burned out 4-foot fluorescent bulb in his left hand.  There was an existing gap (42 inches) between 
the  bottom  of  the  safety  cage  and  the  top  of  the  handrail.    Additionally,  the  shallow  depth  of  the 
platform  results  in  the  handrail  being  nearly  directly  underneath  the  back  of  the  safety  cage.    At  the 
time  of  the  accident,  there  was  no  work  pressure  to  get  the  lights  changed  out  and  it  appears  the 
employee took it upon himself to get this work done during his tour.  The Driller was not notified that the 
work was being conducted in the derrick.

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: 

•  When  climbing  or  descending  a  ladder,  the  person  will  face  the  ladder  and  have  free  use  of  both 
hands.  He will not carry tools or other objects in his hands.  A hand line must be used to raise or 
lower heavy or bulky objects. 

•  A  JSA  should  be  conducted  for  work  in  the  derrick  covering  “equipment  removal  or  installation; 

maintenance; inspection”. 

•  An inspection of all vertical ladders should be conducted.  On landings where the handrail opposite 
the  ladder  is  four  feet  (1¼  meter)  or  less  from  the  rungs  of  the  ladder,  and  the  gap  between  the 
bottom  of  the  safety  cage  and  the  top  of  the  handrail  exists,  this  gap  should  be  closed  unless  the 
ladder is equipped with a ladder fall arrest system.

•  All work projects in the derrick should be cleared with the driller.

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and 

do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee.

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices.

Copyright © 2001 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved

Issued June 2001

