Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 14  
 

HELICOPTER OPERATIONS – GROUND RESONANCE PHENOMENA 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  helicopter  on  a  routine  crew  change  flight  to  a  MODU  landed  on  the  helideck.  The  pilot  and  the  HLO 
(Helicopter Landing Officer) gave each other the “thumbs up” signal indicating that it was safe for the HLO 
and his crew to carry on with their duties.   
 
The HLO & his two Helideck Assistants (HA) approached the chopper  The HLO exchanged manifests with 
the pilot passing it through the cockpit door window, the HLO then opened the forward main passenger door 
and passed the pilot some food for the return trip.  At this time the HAs were unloading the luggage from the 
helicopter side locker which is located on the starboard aft side of the aircraft.  
 
At this point the pilot started to wave at the HLO with both hands as if to tell him to back off from the aircraft, 
Realizing that there was something wrong, the HLO shouted and beckoned for his men to back off from the 
aircraft and retreat to a safe location.  The HLO retreated but had not cleared the helideck, one HA managed 
to clear the helideck but the second HA, who was unloading the luggage from the aircraft, first secured and 
locked the luggage compartment, then he turned to leave the aircraft as it started to lift off from the rig.  It 
lifted approx two metres (two and half feet) and then turned counter clockwise towards him.  He stated at that 
time that he was about three metres (ten feet) from the chopper and that when he saw the tail of the chopper 
coming towards him he crouched down and rolled away from the aircraft.  He then made his way to a safe 
and clear area at the main access and egress point to the helideck.  He suffered no injury to himself although 
he and the other HA were extremely shook up. 
 
When the pilot had landed the chopper for the second time the HLO informed him that he should not have 
lifted off until the all clear was given from the HLO, thereby letting him know that he and his assistants were 
clear and safe; and that it was safe to take off.  The HLO stated that the pilot gave no reason for his actions. 
He reaffirmed that the radio communication with pilot was operational but no messages were relayed to him.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The cause of this incident was an unusual condition 
called  ground  resonance.    When  the  aircraft  landed 
one of its skids rested on one of the helicopter lash 
down  points  on  the  helideck.    Resulting  in  the 
helicopter  laying  at  a  slight  angle  which  was  the 
precursor  to  a  problem  which  causes  and  aircraft 
rotor to oscillate.  Had this been allowed to continue 
there  was  a  risk  of  the  aircraft  flipping  over  on  the 
deck 
 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, these companies did the following: 
 
The actions of the pilot and helideck crew averted a major accident.  By lifting off the pilot was able to allow 
the aircraft to stabilize.  As a result of the incident the following actions were agreed to by the MODU owner 
and the helicopter company.   
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
Immediate 
 
1. 
2.  HLO's were instructed that they are not to provide waiter service to flights. As the supervisor he must 

Issue a Safety Alert to the industry on the subject of Ground Resonance. 

not be given any distraction.  Food can be passed by an HA when safe to do so. 

1.  Added a procedure to the HLO instructions that prior to physical contact with the Helicopter, the HLO will 
visually  observe  under  it  from  a  safe  distance  and  assess  the  skid  location  of  the  helicopter.    If  it  is 
resting on a raised tie down bracket, the pilot will be notified by radio and will lift off and manoeuvre off to 
a safe set down point or will confirm he intends to shutdown the engines on the aircraft. 

2.  All helideck crew members are to be provided with “listen in” only head sets or the HLO is to ensure all 
crew  have  heard  and  understood  the  emergency  clear  request;  and  that  all  are  accounted  for  off  the 
helideck. 

3.  The  tie  down  brackets  are  to  be  painted  (if  permitted)  and  in  accordance  with  correct  regulations  to 

identify the bracket positions to assist in recommendation “1” above. 

 
Short Term 

 

 

 
Long Term 

1.  Number  of  helideck  brackets  is  to  be  reduced  by  removal  and  fitting  of  blanking  plates  to  only  those 

2.  Check what coverage is given in training on aircraft with skids on purely metal decks and also Ground 

required for specific operating aircraft.  

Resonance actions. 

 
Ground  Resonance  is  a  phenomenon  that  has  damaged  or  destroyed  helicopters  and  killed  pilots, 
passengers,  and  bystanders.  The  US  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  records  34  incidents  in  the 
United States since 1990, not including military helicopters or incidents that did not injure people or destroy 
the helicopter. 
 
Not  all  types of  helicopters  are susceptible  to  ground  resonance.    Some  two-blade  helicopters  are  exempt 
because their “teetering” rotors are a single rigid structure, like a see-saw.  The only rotors that can produce 
ground resonance are those with three or more blades.  Multi-blade rotors have lead-lag hinges, which allow 
blades to speed up and slow down at different points as they circle the mast while the helicopter is moving 
forward.  The hinges keep the fluctuating lift and drag forces on each blade from inflicting excessive stresses 
on the rotor hub. Snubbers and dampers limit the motions of the blades. 
 
Because it is massive and spinning at a high speed, the rotor of a helicopter must be properly balanced.  If 
the  lead-lag  hinges  allow  the  blades  to  depart  from  perfect  symmetry,  the  rotor’s  center  of  gravity  shifts 
slightly to one side of the mast, throwing the system out of balance. 
 
Anything that is springy has a favorite frequency of vibration—its natural frequency—which is determined in 
part by its size and mass.  That is why tuning forks always produce a certain tone, and why boats of different 
sizes rock at different rates.  When two things with the same or similar natural frequencies are in contact, or 
sometimes even merely close to each another, and one of them begins to vibrate, it may “excite” the other to 
vibrate  as  well.    The  ability  of  one  vibrating  object  to  create  this  sympathetic  vibration  in  another  is  what 
enables the rotor blades to gain control of the entire helicopter. 
 
The  helicopter’s  airframe  has  its  own  natural  frequency,  which  can  be  excited  by  an  out-of-balance  rotor.  
Usually there is a triggering event: a bump or a landing or takeoff on sloping ground or with a little sideways 
or  forward  motion.    A  jolt  moves  the  mast  while  the  blades,  because  of  the  freedom  of  motion  allowed  by 
their hinges, lag a little behind.  The rotor, now slightly out of balance, begins to wobble like a slowing top.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
If the characteristic vibration frequency of the airframe is close enough to the rate of rotation of the rotor, it 
joins the dance, amplifying the rotor wobble. 
 
The destruction is wrought by the considerable energy stored in the rotor blades.  The shaking rapidly grows 
in violence, exceeding the strength of the mast, transmission mounts, and landing gear.  The cyclic control in 
the  cockpit  flails  about  so  violently  that  the  pilot  cannot  hold  it,  the  rotor  blades  strike  the  tail  boom  or  the 
cockpit, parts begin falling off, and moments later the helicopter may be destroyed. 
 
If ground resonance begins, the pilot’s best option is to get the helicopter into the air.  Once the tires or skids 
are no longer touching the ground, the vibration fades.  If the rotors do not have sufficient speed for flight the 
next  best  remedy  is  to  eliminate  lift  by  reducing  blade  pitch;  shut  down  the  engine;  and  hope  for  the  best 
while waiting for the rotor to slow. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

