Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 15 – 05 
  

RWC – SMASHED FINGER ON TONGS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While tripping 5 7/8” drill pipe stands out of the hole, the Injured Person (IP) smashed his finger between the 
tong  latch  jaw  handle  and  the  tong  latch  lug  jaw.  The  IP  was  in  the  process  of  helping  the  tong  operator 
remove the tong from its position onto the drill string. The IP placed his left hand on the latch jaw handle and 
his right hand on the latch lug jaw when his finger was smashed. IP was taken to the onshore clinic where it 
was diagnosed that he had multiple fractures on his right ring finger. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•Usually, the iron roughneck would be used for this operation. The iron roughneck was out of service at 
the time of incident.  
•No  Job  Hazard  Analysis  (JHA)  had  been  performed  as  Tripping  out  of  the  hole  was  thought  of  as  a 
“Routine Task”.  
•The tongs were in a position where the Driller had no direct line of site. This prevented him from being 
able to supervise all aspects of the task. 
•Failure to follow standard: The Injured Person (IP) did not make use of the green handles supplied on 
the tong as per HSM-2-STD-045, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Standard 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•Job Hazard Analysis (JHA) to be written and reviewed prior to all Tripping Operations. 
•Spare parts for iron roughneck should be kept on hand for any repairs that may be needed. 
•Holding position of the tongs should be in view of the Driller, so he can effectively supervise the task. 
•All  Drill  Floor  equipment  purposely  have  green  handles  on  them  for  manual  use.  All  drilling  equipment 
should only be touched where there are green handles. “Green on Green” (Green gloves on green handles) 
 

Hand in wrong position 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright  2015 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

be applied to their own situations and practices 

Issued July 2015 

