Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 02 
 

MUD PUMP PISTON CHANGE-OUT RESULTS IN RWC 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  crew  was  attempting  to  repair  the  mud  pump  and  at  the  time  of  the  incident,  the  crew  began  to 
remove the piston from the mud pump liner.  In order to remove the piston, the Derrickman(injured person) 
was using a sledgehammer.  
 
While  swinging  the  sledge  hammer,  the  injured  employee  missed  the piston and his  left middle  finger  was 
caught  between  the  mud  pump  liner  and  the  sledge  hammer  handle.    The  injured  employee  sustained  a 
fracture to the finger and lacerations to the top and bottom side of the finger.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
 

Personnel  failed  to  recognize  potential  hazard  for  injury  while  working  in  confined  area  and 
surroundings. 
Personnel  failed  to  use  correct  hand  tools.    An  improper  steel  handled  sledge  hammer  was  in  use 
which compounded the injuries sustained. 
Lack of planning or HSE focus.  The crew failed to conduct pre job safety meeting; they did not plan 
and utilize a Permit to Work (PTW) system; no JSA was utilized.  
Supervision at time of incident was lacking due to Senior Site Rig Manager being off location attending 
monthly safety meeting at the client’s production facility.  Also the line supervisor was not present at 
the time of the incident.   

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Instructed rig personnel to remove improper tools from work site area.   
Employees were given training and awareness towards correct choice and use of tools.   
Rig supervisors were instructed to introduce piston removal tool for maintenance purpose. 
A review of JSA and procedure for removing Mud Pump Piston from Liner was conducted.   
Instructed rig personnel on the  correct use of Permit-to-Work system and how to recognize potential 
injury to personnel by use of safety and equipment check-off list on the PTW document.   
Senior  rig  site  personnel  were  instructed  to  communicate  the  responsibilities  and  duties  of  fellow 
supervisors who will supervise the task when ever senior site manager is off location so the operation 
can be safely carried out and supervised. 
Rig  personnel  were  instructed  to  review  the  following  company  procedures  from  company  HSE 
manual:   

 

 

o  Job Safety Analysis 
o  Permit to Work System 
o  Crew Safety Meetings 
o  Hand Tools 
o  Mud Pumps: Installation of Rods and Pistons 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2010 

