Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 07 
 

HELICOPTER LIFTS OFF WITH OUT WARNING WHILE 

HLO ASSISTS PASSENGER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew-change helicopter was on deck with passengers preparing to disembark.  The Helicopter Landing 
Officer  (HLO)  was  standing  next  to  a  seated  passenger  helping  him  adjust  his  4  –  point  safety  belt.  
Suddenly  and  without  any  radio  notification  or  warning,  the  helicopter  simply  lifted  off  the  deck.    The  HLO 
managed to step back and slide the door closed before the chopper flew away.  There was no visual or radio 
contact giving the “all clear” to pilot before taking off.  The HLO tried to contact the pilots immediately after 
the incident, but there was no reply back.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
According to the helicopter company:  
 

(1)  Pilot training was deficient;  
(2)  The helicopter cabin duties were insufficiently defined allowing confusion;  
(3)  The pilot did not properly assess the situation which lead to the incident;  
(4)  The pilot did not observe the “door open” light.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Immediate Actions by Contractor Resulting in Client’s Follow-up  
 
Since personnel logistics for the operation are a Client matter, the Company Man was informed.  The official 
document,  specific  for  air-related  near  miss  /  incidents  was  completed  and  immediately  forwarded  to  the 
Client. An e-mail was also sent to the Client containing a video of the incident and requesting that corrective 
measures  be  put  in  place.    The  helicopter  company  was  contacted  by  the  Client’s  Representative.    The 
Client’s Flight Safety Officer met with the helicopter company to show the video and discuss the causes and 
preventive measures.  The helicopter company asked for a copy of the video to be used in pilot training in 
order  to  minimize  chances  of  recurrence.    The  Client’s  Contract  Manager  was  also  notified  to  take  the 
necessary  administrative  measures  necessary  to  prevent  recurrence  by  ensuring  the  pilots  adhere  to  their 
checklist procedures for disembarking.  
 
Contractor Initiatives put in place: 
 
If HLO sees he must assist a passenger – or for any need for delay – he is to call the pilot on the radio or 
walk to front of helicopter and signal to delay lift-off.  When assistance is finished, he will radio or signal “all 
clear for take-off.”  
 Pilots  should  be  trained  as  per  the  country-of-operation’s  laws  and  regulations  pertaining  to  helicopter 
operations, which include offshore pilot responsibilities.  Helicopter provider’s pilots should be trained in the 
Client’s  General  Operations  Manual  that  includes  the  safety  rules  related  to  offshore  landing  and  take  off 
procedures.  An  annual  refresher  training  course,  that  includes  flight  simulation  and  HLO  ops,  should  be 
conducted.  
 
Further Recommended Precautions  
 
Large  crew-change  operations  normally  have  a  pilot  and  co-pilot.  It  is  the  practice  of  some  helicopter 
companies for the co-pilot (or pilot) to walk around the helicopter (not tail rotor side) to verify:  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
(1)  All passengers are secure.  
(2)  All hatches and doors are completely closed and secured.  
(3)  There is nothing on or near the helideck that can be sucked into the helicopter’s engine intake port.  
(4)  The landing skids are not caught in the helideck net.  
(5)  HLO and his crew are on standby alert prepared for take-off.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2008 

