Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 27 
 

TOP DRIVE STRIKES JOINT OF TUBING  

RESULTING IN A NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A drilling crew in was in the process of running 4 1/2" tubing.  A joint of tubing was being made up in the rotary, 
while  another  joint  was  being  hoisted  in  from  the  V-Door.  As  the  joint  of  tubing  from  the  V-Door  was  being 
moved  toward  the  mouse  hole,  the  rig  floor  crewman  missed  the  mouse  hole  opening  as  the  air  hoist  was 
being lowered.  The joint of tubing on the air hoist laid over toward and under the descending top drive.  The 
top drive set down on the tubing causing the tubing joint to shoot across the rig floor.  There was damage to 
the tubing joint; however, no injury to personnel occurred. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
This  incident  resulted  from  what’s  called  “simultaneous  operations”,  meaning  that  two  or  more  activities  are 
being  performed  at  the  same  time.    The  potential  for  an  incident  here  was  created  when  the  top  drive  was 
lowered at the same time the tubing was being brought in toward the rotary table.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Informed their crews the following:   
 
Injuries can happen when a joint of pipe gets caught under the descending pipe handling equipment.  Aside 
from the injury potential, the hoisting line could be damaged along with the top drive.  
 
Step one - to prevent this kind of incident from happening is to hold a pre-job safety meeting prior to picking up 
pipe to discuss the job, hazards and where the process might go wrong.  
 
Step two  -  before any downward movement of the blocks occurs, the driller must make sure that nothing is 
happening  on  the  rig  floor  that  could  potentially  cause  a  problem.    An  option  in  this  situation  was  to  use  a 
pickup line so that the driller had complete control of pipe entering the rig floor area and going in the hole.   
 
Drilling operations have experienced previous incidents where the block or block/top drive had contacted the 
monkey  board,  tubulars,  stabbing  board,  hoisting  equipment  or  even  hoisted  personnel.    Note:  A  complete 
lockout/tagout of the drawworks and rotary is necessary when personnel are hoisted.  
 
Simultaneous operations should trigger a pre-job meeting and a discussion among the all affected personnel 
about how one operation can impact another.  Remember, what can go wrong will go wrong if you don’t plan 
for the "what if" possibilities.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2002 

