Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 41 
 

CARGO HANDLING OPERATIONS RESULTS IN FATALITY OF A SUPPLY VESSEL 

CREWMEMBER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An offshore supply vessel was moored on the port side of a jack up rig.  The vessel was moored at the bow 
with a back down buoy system and the stern was moored to the rig using the bow and port leg ropes.  The 
supply vessel had already worked two other rigs prior to arrival and supply boat deck space was limited.  The 
incident occurred just after the noon tour change when the on tour crane operator resumed cargo operations.  
Two supply vessel crewmembers were working as riggers on the boat deck.  An empty chemical container 
was back loaded and spotted on the deck of the supply vessel, but as the crane operator started slacking off 
the hoist wire so the load could be detached, one of the two riggers hand signaled the crane operator to pick 
up a little so the load could be repositioned (pushed) closer to the other cargo.  The crane operator complied 
by  hoisting  the  container  approximately  one  foot  off  the  deck.    As  the  container  cleared  the  deck  it 
unexpectedly  appeared  to  swing  4  feet  to  the  starboard  side  of  the  supply  vessel  and  trapped  one  of  the 
riggers  between  the  swinging  container and  a  power pack  basket setting  on deck.    The  man  was crushed 
and  immediately  collapsed  onto  the  deck.    The  man  was  transported  to  the  rig’s  hospital  and  the  medic 
performed  CPR  for  approximately  30  minutes  however  he  never  regained  consciousness,  breathing  or  a 
pulse. 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
This was a very routine job that is successfully completed on a daily basis without incident.  Complacency 
may have been a factor.  The investigation determined that the boom tip was properly positioned above the 
load as the container was lifted for repositioning.  The cause for the sudden movement may have been due 
to the beam sea that pushed the supply vessel to port making the load appear to swing 4 feet to starboard as 
it was suspended above the deck.  This sudden motion is what caused the container to strike the stationary 
basket.    What  we  don’t  plan  for  can  kill  us.    Planning:    A  basic  generic  Job  Risk  Assessment  was 
reviewed  during  the  pre-tour  meeting  but  the  riggers  on  the  supply  vessel  were  not  part  of  the  risk 
assessment.    This  is  not  an  example  of  proper  risk  assessment  and  if  it  had  been  task  specific  with  all 
workers  involved,  these  risks  would  have  been  identified  and  risk  reduction  measures  put  in  place.  
Communication:  The crane operator had radio communications with the supply vessel captain only.  It was 
never  established  which rigger was  giving  hand  signals  from  the  supply  vessel  or  what  exactly  the  riggers 
plans were.  Communication should have been a priority and it was not.  Environmental Factors:  The 
supply vessel was secured with three point mooring in a beam sea and was subject to a roll of 2 degrees to 
port  and  2  degrees  to  starboard.    Were  environmental  conditions  (vessel  motions)  carefully 
considered?    Time  Out  was  not  called  and  the  job  only  stopped  when  a  man  went  down.    Are  we 
Proactive or Reactive?  
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following summary: 
 
The planning, communication and procedures used to work cargo on this vessel were probably very similar 
to  the  many  other  vessels  that  have  been  worked,  but  with  one  exception,  this  time  a  man  was  killed.  
Unsafe conditions and at risk behaviors continued to add up and because nothing bad happened in the 
past  so  the  job  went  on,  business  as  usual.    Is  this  how  we  do  our  business?    If  we  allow  ourselves  to 
develop  high  risk  tolerance  and  become  comfortable  working  around  things  that  should  concern  us,  we 
become less likely to call Time Out.  Something set this incident into motion and the result was a fatality.  It 
was not identified what kind of training or safety culture the employees working on the supply vessel were 
exposed  to  or  what  tools  they  had  available  to  manage  safety  on  the  job.    What  is  known  is  the  training, 
safety  culture  and  safety  tools  our  employees  have  available  to  manage  safety.    Regardless  of  who  is 
involved we must work to our standards.  If something is not right, stop and make it right.  The photo above 
identifies the CRUSH POINT.  
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2005 

