Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 02 
 

FALL RESULTS IN SERIOUS INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured party (IP), a scaffolding foreman, and another scaffolder were working on the skid beam on a platform.  
They were to remove two temporary sea fastenings.  The work was originally planned as a job for the hook-up and 
commissioning contractor with the scaffolders on a call-out to build scaffolding to allow the commissioning contractor 
to carry out the job from a fixed platform.  After the IP visited the site, he assessed that the scaffolders could do the 
job  using  harnesses  instead  of  building  scaffolding  for  the  commissioning  crew  (the  building  of  this  would  also 
require the use of harnesses).  He agreed this change with the construction supervisor but there was no follow-up 
conversation with the permit authorities.  The first job was carried out successfully.  During the second job, one of 
the  bolts  was  tight  and  the  IP  asked  for  a  second  spanner  wrench.    During  this  operation  one  of  the  spanners 
slipped and the IP lost his balance and fell backwards into the opening to the platform deck 13.5m (45 feet) below, 
hitting  an  inclined  support  beam  on  the  way  down  which  partially  broke  his  fall.    Actual  outcome:  Fractured  pelvis 
with a high potential for a fatality.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  At some stage prior to or during the second job, the IP did not secure his safety line.   
•  There was noncompliance with the requirements for working at heights and permit to work directive. 
•  Four other personnel observed the job but no one checked whether the IP had attached his safety line and no 

one stopped the job. 

•  Control of work.  There was insufficient control of work on the platform caused by a lack of focus and adherence 

to the structure, application and audit of the Permit to Work system. 

•  Management of change.  The installation of the platform alongside an existing facility involved a significant ramp 

up in activity.  Additional processes were put in place to mitigate this risk but these were not adequate. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Compliance  with  working  at  heights  and  permit  to  work  to  be  improved  through  systematic  verification  of  the 

quality of work permits and knowledge of Directives. 

•  Safety expectations to be reinforced for all personnel involved in the installation, with focus on zero tolerance for 
non-compliance with safety rules and platform standards, and personal responsibility to stop work that is unsafe. 
•  Structure and operation of the Permit to Work system on the project to be improved to provide better control of 

work. 
Job description to be developed for the Area Authority role on the platform. 

• 
•  Key Messages: 

o  Rules must be followed 
o  Everyone has an obligation to stop work that is unsafe. 
o  Consult the permit authorities if a job changes, no matter how small the change. 
o  Never  underestimate  the  need  to  ensure  the  controls  that  have  been  put  in  place  to  control  work  are 

actually working. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2004 

