Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 17  
 

WORKING ON OPERATING EQUIPMENT 

RESULTS IN HAND INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  welder  was  experiencing  problems  with  the  governor  control  on  a  portable  welding  machine.    The  welder 
lifted the shroud at the radiator end of the welding machine and was wiggling some electrical wiring when he 
received a 12-volt shock.  His natural reaction was to jerk away and when he did, he hit the radiator cooling 
fan  cutting  his  ring  finger  on  his  left  hand.    It  was  later  determined  to  have  caused  a  hairline  fracture.    He 
returned to work following x-rays and a bandage. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The welder exposed the rotating fan when he opened the engine shroud and there was no guard around the 
fan, fan belt or drive pulley.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  A list is to be made on each rig of fan blades, rotating shafts and related fan belts on equipment.  This list 
should be a basis for a fan blade/rotating shaft/fan belt audit.  Inspect each fan blade, rotating shaft and 
belt (also drive chain) for an adequate guard.   

• 

•  The  guards  should  be  sufficient  to  cover  all  rotating  parts  and  any  expanded  metal  mesh  should  have 
small  enough  openings  where  a  finger  cannot  enter  (not  over  3/8”).    Guards  should  not  be  removed, 
except for maintenance, service or adjustment and only when the equipment is properly locked out.   
In work areas where there are fans that are not normally guarded due to their location near the ceiling or 
other area that is not readily accessible, the control to these fans should be locked or tagged out before 
any work is started in near proximity to the fans.  Be sure to verify the isolation of equipment by testing the 
normal  operating  controls  and  return  the  off/on  switch  to  the  off  position  before  proceeding  with  the 
maintenance.   

•  Examples  of  equipment  with  fan  blades/rotating  shafts/belts  are:    heater  fans,  bug  fans,  engines, 
centrifugal  pumps,  oiler  pumps,  drawworks,  mud  pumps,  mud  agitators,  shakers,  cold  starts,  welding 
machines,  water  pumps,  cellar  pumps,  mobile  equipment  etc.    Make  a  list  of  your  rig’s  equipment  and 
perform an audit to ensure adequate guarding around rotating parts.   

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued April 2003 

