Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 38  
 

HAND INJURY RESULTS FROM MISCOMMUNICATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After  setting  cement  plug  the  crew  was  to  lay  out  the  cement  line.  The  chicksan  was  removed  from  the 
“Pump- In” sub.  The connection between the pump-in sub and drill pipe was to be broken with the use of the 
Iron  Roughneck™  so  the  sub  could  be  removed  with  a  chain  tong.    The  Iron  Roughneck™  Operator  was 
asked to repeat this action to ensure the sub was loose enough to use a chain tong.  He was then instructed 
to remove the Iron Roughneck™ but by mistake began to back out the sub.  Just as he did this the IP placed 
his hand on the Iron Roughneck™ to assist in its removal from the sub.  The pump-in sub with Lo-Torque 
valve  spun  and  caught  the  IP’s  fingers.    He  suffered  severe  injuries  to  the  ring  finger  resulting  in  three 
quarters of it being amputated.  The middle and index fingers sustained fractures and cuts.  
 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
There are a few ways in which this situation went wrong:  
 

Incorrect use of equipment by Iron Roughneck™ Operator.  
Incorrect hand placement on the Iron Roughneck™ by IP.  

• 
• 
•  Poor observation from the IP, as he was not concentrating on what the IR Operator was doing.  
•  Poor communication between the Iron Roughneck™ Operator and the Rig manager as the operator 

did not understand the Rig Manager’s instruction.  

•  Failure to remove the Lo-Torque valve prior to removing the sub.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The following learning/corrective actions have been identified and implemented:  
 

•  Equipment:  Instructed personnel that when using any equipment, think about and discuss the 

potential hazards associated with it.  

•  Pinch Points:  Instructed personnel on the identification of all pinch points with all kinds of 

equipment. Instructed Rig managers to color code the pinch points.  

•  Hand Placement:  Instructed personnel to continually ask: “What could happen if I place my hand 

•  Communication:  Instructed personnel to always remind each other to watch out for hazards to 

avoid complacency. If you are not totally sure of instructions, ask for clarification.  

here?”  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2007 

