Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 08 
 

LTA - FLOORMAN STRUCK BY SNUB LINE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Operations were in progress to retrieve a storm packer set at 364’ RKB with 121 stands 5” drill pipe hung 
below  the  packer.    The  storm  packer-retrieving  tool  was  made  up  to  the  first  stand  of  drill  pipe  and  three 
more stands of drill pipe were run.  The forth stand was lowered until a single was above the rotary table and 
landed on the slips.  The backup tongs were placed on the tool joint to back up the make up of the top drive 
system  (TDS).    As  the  TDS  connection  shouldered,  the  tongs  bit  and  then  momentarily  released  and 
immediately bit again, causing the 1” snub line to “whip” and strike the Floorhand on the back left side.  The 
Floorhand  suffered  4  cracked  ribs,  a  bruised  lung  and  kidney  and  a  lacerated  spleen  from  the  snub  line 
contact. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The  tongs slipped  due  to poor contact with  the  tool joint  allowing  slack  to  form  in  the  snub  line,  which 

created the whipping effect when the tongs regained their bite on the tool joint.  

2.  There was not sufficient weight on the slips to hold the pipe against the rotational torque from the TDS 

with the rotary brake applied.  

closer to the Floorhand.  

3.  The length of the snub line allowed the tongs to rotate past 90 degrees to the pipe, bringing the snub line 

4.  The  spin  function  was  used  to  turn  the  TDS,  which  applies  immediate  rotation  at  40  RPM  until  the 

connection shoulders and the TDS stalls at 4-5K ft/lbs of torque.  

5.  The RBS could have been used to back up the TDS. 
 
CORRECTIVE  ACTIONS:    To  address  this  incident,  this  company  issued  the  directives  to  rig 
personnel:  
 
1.  The RBS shall be used to backup the make up of the TDS.  
2.  Should  there  be  string  configuration  issues  that  restrict  the  use of  the RBS,  the  tongs  may  be used  to 
back  up  the  TDS  make  up,  provided  that  the  rotation  of  the  TDS  is  controlled  at  a  minimal  speed  by 
selecting the drilling mode and reducing the drilling torque to the minimum setting.  

3.  All  JSAs  for  operations  where  the  TDS  is  made  up  are  to  be  reviewed  and  modified  to  reflect  these 

requirements.  

4.  All crews are to be briefed on these requirements, and this is to be documented. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2005 

