Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 47 
 

ELEVATOR LINK-TILT INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Drill crew was preparing to pick up a pup-joint from the mouse hole.  A Floorhand was positioned behind 
the pup-joint to latch the elevators.  The link-tilt was engaged with a rope for full extension.  The Driller, who 
engaged the link-tilt and, thinking the elevators were latched, disengaged it.  Meanwhile, the Floorhand trying 
to latch the elevators followed them back when they where disengaged until his chest came to rest on the 
pup-joint.  The pup-joint was spinning a little so the Floorhand grabbed the pup-joint to regain his balance.  
The Driller realized that the elevators did not latch so he re-engaged the link-tilt.  As he did, he turned to face 
the mouse hole and saw the Floorhand holding the pup-joint - but it was too late.  The elevators caught his 
left index finger and his right little finger.  He suffered a partial amputation to his index finger and a laceration 
to the little finger that required 3 sutures. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  Driller  had  no  indication  whether  the  elevators  were  latched  or  not.    He  should  have  waited  for 
confirmation. Also he should not have re-engaged the link-tilt until he had notified all personnel in the area 
and had confirmation that it was clear to do so. 
 
The Floorhand should not have followed the elevators when the link-tilt was disengaged.  He should have let 
go and notified the Driller that they where not latched and moved to a Safe area. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following action items:   
 
Action Items 
 
•  Revise the JSA to include the hazards involved with the link-tilt. 
•  Notify personnel before the link-tilt is engaged 
•  Do not disengage the link-tilt until notified that the elevators are latched 
•  Do not re-engaged the link-tilt until personnel have been notified 
•  Do not assume what you can’t see, maintain good communications at all times 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2005 

