Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 02 – 40  
 

ROUSTABOUT ON TOP OF PIPE ON RACK RESULTS IN AN LTI  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While laying down the BHA preparing for an upcoming casing job, two roustabouts were working the catwalk receiving the 
tubulars laid down off the drill floor.  A roustabout was positioned on each end of a drill collar while it was on the catwalk.  
They proceeded to sling up the tubular for lifting onto the pipe rack.  Once they had attached a sling & tag line on each 
end, the roustabout nearest the V-Door gave the crane operator the signal to hoist up the load.  The tubular was hoisted 
and spotted onto the pipe rack with both roustabouts utilizing the tag lines to position the load.  Both roustabouts scaled 
the pipe rack to release the rigging on the tubular and prepared for their next lift.   
 
The roustabout on the drill floor end of the pipe rack had released his rigging and observed his co-worker do the same and 
they both climbed down off the pipe rack on their respected ends.  When the roustabout on the drill floor end of the pipe 
rack reached the main deck he signaled the crane operator to hoist up and slew over atop the catwalk, and then turned to 
walk that way in preparation for their next lift.   
 
The roustabout on the bow end noticed that the tag line on his rigging was underneath the tubular and without signaling the 
crane operator to stop, he quickly ascended the pipe rack and straddled the tubular they had just laid down, and attempted 
to remove the tag line.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The crane operator’s view was obstructed by a wire line unit and he did not see the roustabout climb back up.  Neither the 
crane operator nor the signalman knew that the other roustabout had gone back onto the pipe rack.  As the crane operator 
lifted the slings, the tag line pulled out from under the tubular and caused the drill collar to roll on top of the roustabout’s 
foot  and  ankle  resulting  in  a  broken  ankle  and  a  lost  time  incident.    Lastly,  with  the  signalman  turning  away  from  the 
operation to move on to the next lift, it appears that these personnel were in a hurry.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions to all rig 
personnel:   
 
•  Rigging is to be removed by hand on all lifts when completed.   
•  Personnel in charge of the lift must not let the crane operator pull the slings and tag lines out from under the loads. 
•  The signalman must watch the whole operation until everything (everyone) is clear and must maintain visual contact 

with his team members, as well as the crane operator.   

•  The signalman must never turn away from the operation before it is completed.   
•  Anytime the view of the crane operator or even an air hoist operator is obstructed, that fact must be communicated to 

all personnel involved. 

•  Personnel  involved  in  a  move  must  be  trained  to  understand  that  nothing  is  done  without  communicating  it  to  the 

signalman or crane operator.  The chances for injury are too great and too serious.   

•  Working too fast must be avoided at all costs. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2002 

