Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 25  
 

SNAGGED HOIST LINE RESULTS IN FRACTURED VERTEBRAE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During cementing operations  while utilizing the hoist  line on the rig, a floor hand  was being hoisted  up the 
mast to tighten the manifold for the cement head.  The crew decided to use a 20 foot (6m) extension chain, 
which  was  connected  to  the  hoist  line,  in  an  attempt  to  keep  the  swivel  connection  above  the  hoisted 
employees  head  while  working  at  any  given  height.    While  the  floor  hand  was  being  hoisted,  the  swivel 
connection got caught under the casing stabbing basket on the driller’s side.  Neither the floor hand nor the 
employee  running  the  hoist  noticed  the  swivel  had  snagged.    Not  realizing  that  the  swivel  was  snagged, 
which put extreme tension on the lifting cable, the employee running the hoist continued lifting the floor hand 
to the required height.  Once the swivel connection was pulled out from under the stabbing basket, the floor 
hand was thrown upward and then dropped approximately 3 feet (91cm) to the end of the slack in the hoist 
line.  After the floor hand dropped to the end of the slack, it caused the hoisting cable to jerk him resulting in 
a compression fracture to his spine. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Neither the employee running the hoist nor the injured employee noticed that the swivel was entangled.  
(The  employee  running  the  hoist  was  in  his  second  hitch  in  the  drilling  industry  and  was  new  to  the 
company.) 

•  With the extension chain placing the swivel connection 20 feet (6m) above the hoisted employees head, 
which was essentially 40-50 feet (12m–15m) above the rig floor, the swivel connection was at a distance 
too far away for both employees to keep a constant visual on the swivel and keep it free from hanging 
up.  

•  The  injured  employee  was  wearing  his  fall  protection;  however,  with  the  slack  in  the  line,  the  fall 
protection did not engage until the slack was taken out during the fall.  Under normal conditions the fall 
protection would have engaged within 3 inches (8cm). 
Inexperience and lack of supervision.  The tool-pusher was on the drill floor; however, he was engaged 
with another task and was not directly supervising the lift. 

• 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  crew  was  reminded  that  a  JSA  for  this  particular  task  shall  be  updated  and  or  reviewed  for  this 

operation and should point out possible hazards during the hoisting of personnel. 

•  All personnel were reminded that during any operation involving the hoisting of personnel, supervision by 

the tool pusher is required and mandatory.   

•  The tool pushers were reminded that only experienced rig personnel or the tool pusher are authorized to 

operate the hoist during the lifting of personnel.  No exception! 

•  All personnel involved in the hoisting operation shall remain in constant communication and stop the job 

if they see an unsafe act or condition. 

•  Company tool pushers suggested that the casing could  be  landed closer to the  rig floor to prevent the 
need to be hoisted to higher levels.  This would allow the hoisted employee to stay within a safe visual 
working area. 

•  The  practice  of  using  extension  chains  during  personnel  hoisting  was  banned  on  all  rigs.    This  would 

keep the swivel connection at a safe visual distance should it become hung up within the mast. 

•  Company HSE personnel suggested using a tag line attached to the hoisted employee, which could be 

used to help maneuver the hoisted employee up through the mast. 

•  Maintenance  personnel  suggested  that  roll  pipe  should  be  installed  on  exposed  edges  throughout  the 

mast to eliminate areas where hoisting equipment could become snagged. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2012 

