Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 45 
 

FILLING CASING WITH HIGH PRESSURE MUD PUMP  

RESULTS IN A LOST TIME INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig was in the process of running casing.  While filling the casing with mud, a floorman closed the fill line 
valve  when  the  casing  was  full.    When  he  closed  the  valve,  the  pressure  build  up  in  the  line  surpassed  the 
working pressure of the valve causing line failure.  The floorman was struck with debris and required medical 
attention.  The result was a Lost Time Incident.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  investigation  showed  that  the  rig  was  using  its  high-pressure  mud  pump  to  fill  casing.    The  fill  line 
components did not meet the pressure requirements of the high-pressure mud pump. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Directed  the  Rig  Managers  to  ensure  that  the  only  centrifugal  mud  pumps  are  directly  connected  to  the 

• 
• 
• 

casing fill line on all of the company rigs.    
Instructed rig personnel to use a ball type valve with a 90-degree filling extension on the end of the fill line.  
Instructed rig personnel that casing fill line should not allow for main mud pumps to be used to fill casing.   
Instructed  rig  personnel  that  only  in  an  emergency  situation  should  the  main  mud  pumps  be  used  to  fill 
casing.   

•  Suggested that on rigs with Top Drives, the use of the Top Drive may eliminate this problem. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2003 

