 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 08  

MAINTENANCE ON ACCOMMODATION’S ELEVATOR RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
During  the  maintenance  of  the  activation  system  of  the  load  lift  door,  a  team  comprising  of  an  electrician  (injured  person)  and  an 
electronic  technician  decided  to  visually  check  the  accommodation’s  elevator,  in  order  to  compare  both  mechanisms  to  facilitate  the 
repair  of  the  load  lift.    When  checking  the  accommodations  elevator,  the  electrician  entered  the  elevator,  climbed  on  the  top  of  the 
cabin,  changed  the  operation  mode  from  “Auto”  to  “Inspection”  (maintenance  mode),  and  performed  the  required  inspections.    The 
electrician was unable to determine what was affecting the activation mechanism of the load lift.  Concluding the inspection, he took the 
lift  down  to  just  above  the  lower  floor.    He  then  changed  the  operation  mode  to  “Auto”  and  leaned  over  the  structure  of  the  door 
activation mechanism, which placed his head between the lift structure and the door sill of the higher level.  Since the lift was positioned 
above the so called “door zone,” it started its lifting process to level the elevator, which compressed the electrician’s head resulting in 
the fatality. 
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  Activity performed without a Permit to Work, including proper energy isolation.  Thus the risks were not assessed. 
• 
• 
•  Activity performed without supervision. 
•  Poor safety culture. 

Lack of procedure for elevator maintenance. 
Lack of training for the elevator maintenance team. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

The  company  reminded  all  installation  personnel  to  include  the  supervision  or  immediate  leadership  in  maintenance  activity 
planning; 

•  Rig Managers were instructed to keep strict control of the correct utilization of Risk Analysis and the Permit to Work system; 
•  All Rig Managers and maintenance employees were reminded that, during services planning and PTW issuance, they are required 

to know the equipment that they will be using in order to identify the appropriate training to perform the task; 

•  All employees were reminded to apply and follow all company operating policies/procedures and to enforce the concept of “If in 

• 
• 

• 

doubt, Stop!” 
The company reinforced the leadership role of all Rig Managers and focus on safety; 
The  company  set  out  to  clearly  define  the  maintenance  activities  to  be  carried  out  by  the  onboard  crew  and  the  ones  to  be 
performed by specialized companies/manufacturers, based on manufacturers manuals and instructions; 
The company established training requirements (operation, rescue, maintenance) which were provided to elevator manufacturers 
upon delivery of equipment to offshore units. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2014 

