Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 10 
 

DROPPED STRING – HIGH POTENTIAL INCIDENT RESULTS FROM 

PULLING AGAINST CLOSED BOP PIPE RAMS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While laying down 5" drill pipe the crew proceeded until there were 3 stands in the well.  The Company Man 
stopped  the operation  and  instructed  the  drill crew to  use  the cementing  unit  pump  to  conduct  an  integrity 
test on the cement plug and casing against the BOP top pipe rams.  A pre-job safety meeting was conducted 
by the Senior Toolpusher (STP) for the driller and the drilling crew.  After pressure testing, the cement plug / 
casing showed pressure leakage.  The pressure was bled off and the STP went to the Company Man’s office 
for further instructions.  Prior to leaving the rig floor the STP informed the driller not to forget to open up the 
top rams and to pull out the string.  The driller decided to assist the crew in disconnecting and lying down the 
cementing line, valve and circulation head prior to pulling the final three stands of drill pipe.  When starting to 
pull the last three stands out of the hole the driller felt an over-pull and remembered that top rams were still 
closed.  No remarkable change in Martin Decker reading was observed by the driller since the lower tool joint 
wasn’t against the top rams due to the spacing out for pressure testing.  When the tool joint reached to the 
top rams, the drill pipe started to stretch and unfortunately, the driller didn’t have enough time to respond and 
stop the operation especially, since the string had already traveled 6 ft. upwards.  The drill string parted and 
the rest of the string (8 joints of pipe + about 27'of the parted joint of DP) was dropped down into the well.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  Lack of supervision from STP. 
• 
•  By  “testing  against  the  top  BOP  rams,  the  rig  crew  did  not  follow  the  company’s  recommended 

Inexperienced driller as he was recently promoted and still in the probation period. 

drilling practices. 

maximum over-pull. 

•  Drilling instrumentation / drilling chart recorder wasn’t operating thus it was not possible to verify the 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Short Term Actions: 
 

• 

Instructions  were  given  to  all  rig  crews  to  always  perform  as  cement  /  casing  integrity  test  against 
blind rams. 

•  Rig Superintendents are to provide coaching by at rig sites. 

•  Rig supervisors are to perform proper planning of work scopes and divide them up to several sub-

operations with each having their own pre-job meetings. 

•  Additional  supervisory  resources  shall  be  assigned 

to  company  rigs 

i.e.  additional 

field 

 
Long Term Actions: 
 

superintendent. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

