Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 05 – 33 
 

LABELING OF CONTAINERS – HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  employee  transferred  methanol  from  a  storage  drum  to  a  plastic  drinking  water  container  marked  for 
drinking water.  The container was then stored in the side box of the employee’s truck.  The employee forgot 
that  he  had  placed  methanol  in  the  drinking  water  container,  and  on  the  following  day  he  drank  from  the 
container.  He was rushed to the hospital and treated for methanol poisoning. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Material was transferred into a container that was not properly labeled for the material. 
2.  A drinking water bottle was used to store a hazardous material without the label being changed to show 

the actual contents.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following control statement: 
 
1.  Drinking water containers must never be used for anything other than drinking water.  
 
2.  All secondary containers must be labeled according to requirements established in the company’s HSE 

Labeling – Standard.  This standard contains the following requirements:  

a.  All chemical containers in the workplace must be labeled.  
b.  Original or portable product containers that will be transported or shipped must have labels 

containing the following information:  

I.  Name and address of the chemical manufacturer or distributor  
II.  Name of the product – must be identical to the name on the MSDS  
III.  Appropriate physical and health warning statements  
IV.  Shipping information when applicable  

c.  Portable containers that will not be transported or shipped must be labeled with the following 

I.  Name of the product – must be identical to the name on the MSDS  
II.  Appropriate physical and health warning statements  

d.  Portable containers into which hazardous chemicals are transferred from labeled containers and are 

intended only for the immediate use (during the work shift) by the employee who performs the 
transfer must be marked with at least the name of the chemical. 

 

 

 

 
 

information:  

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2005 

