Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 18 
 

INADVERTENT UNLATCHING OF WELLHEAD CONNECTOR 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently  a  semi  submersible  inadvertently  unlatched  the  subsea  wellhead  connector  on  a  recently 
perforated  well.    Upon  the  wellhead  connector  unlatching  the  differential  pressure  between  the  weighted 
completion  fluid  in  the  riser  and  the  normal  seawater  pressure  caused  the  stack  to  separate  from  the 
wellhead  and  the  seal  to  be  lost.    The  fluid  level  in  the  riser  equalized  to  the  seawater  hydrostatic.    The 
subsequent  loss  of  hydrostatic  pressure  allowed  an  influx  of  crude  oil  into  the  well  bore.    Quick  action  in 
getting  the  connector  re-latched  and  the  seal  reestablished  averted  a  catastrophic  well  control  and 
environmental situation.   
 
How did this occur? 
 
Prior  to  running  the  stack  two  weeks  previously,  maintenance  was  performed  on  the  stack.    During  this 
maintenance several hoses were disconnected to perform certain maintenance exercises, in particular, the 
wellhead connector hoses on the Yellow Pod side were disconnected to test the hydraulic operating system 
of  the  connector.    It  is  not  100%  certain  which  hoses  in  the  connector  circuit  on  the  Yellow  Pod  were 
crossed, it is certain that the lock and unlock circuits were crossed.  Prior to running the BOP the stack was 
pressure tested on the stump and function tested on the skid beams. The Function Test Checklist was used 
and  completed  by  the  Subsea  Engineer  who  was  operating  the  functions  from  the  HPU  and  had  rig 
personnel and a Subsea Trainee verifying the functions.  It appears that poor communications and possible 
lack of understanding led to the crossed hoses and the resulting incorrect operation of the connector during 
the function testing.  This was the first failure of our verification system.  
 
Upon landing onto a previously run subsea tree, the Subsea Engineer powered up the system, selected the 
Blue  Pod,  and  latched  the  wellhead  connector.    The  latching  up  operation  was  witnessed  by  Rig 
Management via the ROV.  The observations showed that the connector was locked and an over pull was 
successfully  carried  out.    Although  not  called  for  in  his  procedures,  the  Subsea  Engineer  switched  to  the 
Yellow Pod to check on the operation of the connector.  However, it appears that poor communication and 
lack  of  understanding  of  the  process  did  not  detect  that  the  connector  had  gone  to  unlock  upon  switching 
from the Blue Pod to the Yellow Pod. (The stack had down weight on the wellhead and seawater in the riser 
– this precluded the stack lifting seen later.)  Believing things were okay, the Subsea Engineer switched back 
to the Blue Pod, and the BOP was tested using the Blue Pod.  Rig operations proceeded for two weeks with 
the BOP stack operating on the Blue Pod and the problem went undetected.  This is the second failure of 
our verification system.  After the well had been perforated and prior to completion operations, the Subsea 
Engineer prepared for the required bi-weekly pressure test of the BOP system which was to be conducted 
with the Yellow Pod.  The Subsea Engineer switched to the Yellow Pod while the rig crew was preparing to 
run the test plug.  Just prior to running the test plug into the riser that it became apparent that the fluid level 
had  fallen  significantly  in  the  riser.    The  ROV  was  run  to  bottom  and  it  was  verified  that  the  wellhead 
connector  had  unlocked  and  the  BOP  had  lifted  approximately  3”.    The  Subsea  Engineer  noted  that  all 
indicators  on  the  Yellow  Pod  circuit  showed  the  connector  to  be  locked.    The  Subsea  Engineer  switched 
back to Blue and it was observed that the connector immediately attempted to go to lock position.  The well 
was brought under control and the rig proceeded to clean up the fluid in the riser and well.  The responding 
team’s investigation surmised that there were crossed hoses on the wellhead connector Yellow Pod circuit.  
To temporarily correct the operation of the wellhead connector, the pilot lines at the hose reels were switched 
and  the  proper  operation  of  the  connector  confirmed  on  the  Yellow  Pod  circuit.    The  seriousness  of  this 
incident cannot be understated.  A major environmental incident was barely averted. 
 
Why did this occur? 
 
1.  Hoses were not installed properly and the work was not checked by a competent person on completion. 
2.  The company Function Test Checklist Procedures failed to detect the improper operation prior to running 

the BOP. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
3.  A further opportunity to detect improper operation of the connector was missed during the landing and 

latch up operations. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
Directives 
 
1.  Where  the  control  circuits  on  the  wellhead  or  LMRP  connector  are  disturbed  for  whatever  reason,  the 
Senior Subsea Engineer or a Subsea Supervisor (if present) will personally verify and document that the 
circuits are reinstated correctly. 

2.  The  Senior  Subsea  Engineer  onboard  or  a  Subsea  Supervisor  (if  onboard)  will  personally  observe, 
verify, and document the function tests performed prior to running the BOPs.  The Function Test Check 
List will be used during the tests. Competent personnel will assist the Subsea Engineer by operating the 
control system from a control station selected by the Subsea Engineer.  A pre-job meeting will be held 
where  all  Safety,  Operations,  and  Communications  details  are  agreed  upon  prior  to  commencing  the 
operation.  A JSA must be completed prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the OIM to insure 
that competent personnel are made available to assist the Subsea Engineer during this process.  

3.  Over pull and pressure testing: 

a)  Upon  initial  landing  of  the  BOP  upon  the  wellhead,  visual  confirmation  via  ROV  or  Rig  TV  of  the 

wellhead being latched with the initial Pod selected will be verified by the OIM. 

b)  An over pull of at least 50,000 lbs. above landing weight will be conducted and verified by the OIM 

with the initial Pod selected. 

c)  Upon  satisfactory  completion  of  the  first  over  pull  the  opposite  Pod  will  be  selected,  with  visual 
confirmation that the connector remains latched after selection is complete.  A second over pull of at 
least 50,000 lbs. above landing weight will be conducted and verified by the OIM. 

d)  Pressure  testing  of  the  wellhead  connector  seal  of  at  least  500  psi  will  also  be  conducted  initially 
using  both  Pods.  One  test  on  the  standby  Pod  is  sufficient.  These  pressure  tests  must  be  done 
before any well operations are conducted that could expose any formation to the BOPs. 

 
Action Item – All Semi-submersibles 
 
1.  Changes to the individual rig’s BOP stack function test checklist and running procedures must be made 
to include the above directives immediately.  Once completed, forward the procedures to the assigned 
Subsea Supervisor for review and approval.   

 
2.  These corrective  actions  are  effective  immediately  upon  receipt  of  this  alert  on  a  fleet  wide basis.  Any 

deviation requires a Management of Change (MOC) approved at the Vice President level. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2005 

