Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 12   
 

MISUSE OF HIGH PRESSURE CLEANER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Assistant Driller requested that the injured person (IP) assist the Night Mechanic in attempting to clear 
the suction line for the pump that was used to empty the cellar.  The IP held the hose while the Night 
Mechanic would use the HP wash down gun inside the hose.  When the Night Mechanic activated the gun, 
the took him by surprise.  The HP wash down gun kicked up and the HP nozzle swiped the IP across his 
face from his chin to his right ear. 
 
Note: The IP is a ‘Yellow Hat’ trainee who had only worked for 3 days on the rig 
 
Attached photos show the improper job and the face of IP. 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
• 

Incorrect Procedure – Clearing the hose in such a manner using a HP wash down gun when one man is 
in the line of fire is hazardous and irresponsible. 
•  Lack of Supervision – The job was uncontrolled. 
•  Lack of Safety Awareness –The person using the HP wash down gun obviously did not understand the 

risks he was exposing the IP too. 

•  Equipment Misused – The HP wash down gun has a regulator which can be adjusted to change the 

pressure.  This had been adjusted to its maximum pressure setting, causing the unexpected kickback. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives: 
 
•  The rig personnel were instructed to order the correct ball valve / filter for use with the pump suction line 

to reduce the risk of foreign objects blocking the suction line. 

•  Supervisors were reminded that they are to hold mandatory Pre-job safety meeting prior to any task 

requiring the use of the HP wash down gun. 

•  Only authorized personnel are to adjust the regulator of the HP wash down gun.  
•  Maintenance personnel were instructed that a pressure gauge is to be fitted on the pump. 
•  Company policy on new trainees (Yellow Hats) regarding, induction, training and how they are 

supervised at the rig site must be implemented. 

•  All onsite staff including new trainees should be fully aware of in their reporting responsibilities regarding 

injuries or near misses. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2007 

