Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 41 
 

IMPROPER HAND PLACEMENT ON CASING TONG 

RESULTS IN FINGER INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  running  7”  casing  in  the  hole,  the  injured  person  (roustabout)  together  with  the  derrickman  were 
handling  the  hydraulic  casing  tong,  to  screw  and  tighten  both  joints.    The  derrickman  was  in  charge  of 
operating  the  hydraulic  casing  tong  and  the  roustabout  was  in  charge  to  open  and  close  the  casing  tong 
around the casing.  The roustabout had his left hand on the casing tong handle to guide the entrance of the 
jaw toward the casing joint.  The derrickman pushed the casing tong to approach the casing.  The effect of the 
weight  and  the  movement  of  the  casing  tong  resulted  in  the  roustabout’s  middle  finger  and  first  finger  to  be 
pinched between the casing and the power tong handle.  The incident resulted in partially cutting off the first 
phalange of middle finger.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
There was inadequate leadership/supervision and lack of control.  Commitment and leadership were lacking.  
There  was  a  need  for  Risk  Management.    The  injured  person  did  not  anticipate  the  hazard  of  his  hand 
placement.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Conducted Safety Meetings to discuss the incident with all crews, (Prior to operating any Tong, it should 

be positioned correctly for the Task). 
Instructed personnel to make sure the casing tong is positioned correctly prior to starting the operation. 

• 
•  A  review  of  the  procedure  was  conducted  and  investigated  the  possibility  of  using  a  short  rope  on  the 

casing tong handle to guide the entrance of the jaw toward the casing joint. 

•  Re-emphasized the company’s Hands & Fingers Refresher Campaign.  
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2003 

