Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 54  
 

PERSONNEL HOISTING INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An employee was being hoisted into the derrick using a man rider hoist and a wooden-seat riding belt.  As 
the employee was being elevated he was using his foot to kick away from the top-drive, at which time his foot 
became entrapped.  The personnel hoisting operation was stopped and fortunately, the employee was not 
seriously injured. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Man was not aware of where he placed his foot and the potential hazard on the top drive that caught his foot.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
• 

Instructed all supervisors to discuss this incident with all crew members and remind them to be aware of 
their foot placement at all times. 

 
• 

 

Instructed all personnel to continue to adhere to the company’s Personnel Lifting and Fall Protection 
policy.  Ensuring that: 

o  JSAs are completed or reviewed each time a man is to go into a riding belt for personnel hoisting 

operations.  

o  JSAs are specific for Man Riding Operations and not viewed as part of the larger task.  
o  A direct line of sight is maintained at all times.  When this is not possible, a person is assigned 

who has NO other duties than to flag the hoist operator.   

o  Establish who is in charge of the personnel hoisting operation. 

 
Instructed employees to pay close attention to your surroundings at all times. 

• 
 
•  Continued training newly assigned personnel in Personnel Hoisting Operations and Hoist Operations. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued December 2002 

