Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 20 
 

TRAPPED PRESSURE FOLLOWING CASING TEST 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
13 3/8" casing was run into the hole and cemented in place.  The float collar and cement were drilled out with 
a mud motor and the BOP was closed to test the casing.  The pressure was brought up to 1500 psi with the rig 
pump.  Following the test the driller attempted to bleed down the  pressure through the standpipe.   Pressure 
would  not  bleed  back  through  the  mud  motor,  so  the  HCR  was  opened  to  bleed  back  through  the  choke 
manifold.    The  driller  instructed  everyone  to  stand  back  as  he  opened  the  BOP.    Pressure  blew  the  inner 
bushings out of the rotary table.  No injuries resulted. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A pre-job safety meeting was held prior to the pressure test, but did not include how the pressure was to be 
bled off when the test was complete.  This was an essential step in the process that was omitted and serious 
injuries could have occurred.   
 
The mud motor impeded the bleed  back through the standpipe so the Driller elected to go through the HCR 
and choke manifold. The rig personnel assumed the flow path was lined up, and did not check the flow path to 
be  certain  the  pressure  could  be  bled  off  through  the  choke  manifold.    Also,  no  one  checked  the  casing 
pressure gauge after opening the HCR valve to ensure the pressure had gone to zero.   
 
The  driller  on-tour  was  not  informed  that  the  mechanic  had  worked  on  the  Superchoke  earlier  in  the  day.  
Therefore,  he  was  unaware  that  the  Superchoke  had  not  lined  the  choke  manifold  up  to  its  standard 
configuration. 
 
This procedure of bleeding off pressure following casing tests is very common and casing is tested against the 
BOP’s  every  day  in  operations.    Circumstances  alter  the  way  the  pressure  must  be  bled  off,  i.e.,  having  a 
check valve in the kill line, a float in the drill string, a piece of a rubber drill pipe protector lodged in the mud 
cross, to name a few.  Personnel must be certain that the pressure is completely bled off before opening the 
BOP to the atmosphere.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  Rig personnel were instructed to develop a JSA, "Bleeding Pressure to Zero Following a Casing Test".   
•  This  same  JSA  may  work  for  bleeding  pressure  to  zero  following  a  formation  integrity  test.    (A  related 
issue is having the annulus open to the atmosphere below the test plug when testing BOPE, to ensure the 
test joint doesn't become a missile.)   

•  The topic of bleeding off pressure should be discussed every time the casing is tested.   
•  Ask the question, "How can we verify that the pressure is gone before we open the BOPs?"   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2003 

