Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 34 
 

COUPLING FAILURE BETWEEN DRAWWORKS DRIVE SHAFT AND ELECTRIC 

AUXILARY BRAKE….ALLOWS BLOCKS TO FALL 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While washing down the 7” liner assembly on 5 ½” DP which weighed 364,000 pounds (total l65 metric T) in 
open  hole  the  Driller  heard  a  loud  bang.    This  was  immediately  followed  by  loss  of  the  electric  auxiliary 
brake's  control  over  the  assembly’s  descent.    The  Driller  vigorously  applied  the  manual  brake  to  slow  the 
descent  and  called  for  the  slips.    The  string  descended  approximately  52  ft  (16  m)  before  a  Floorman 
managed to set the slips.  The blocks came to rest about 28 ft (4.6 m) above rotary table.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Investigation  revealed  that  the  coupling  sleeve  that  mates  the  electric  brake  shaft  to  the  drawworks  drum 
shaft had disengaged allowing the string to fall.  This occurred because the coupling sleeve’s female spline 
had  not  fully  engaged  and  was  only  partially  covering  the  drawworks  drum  shaft  male  splines.    An 
inspection showed signs of excessive wear at the shaft end.  This partial engagement was due to the rotating 
sleeve  gradually  backing  off  the  drawworks  drum  shaft  thereby  allowing  it  to  contact  and  wear  down  the 
coupling’s cast iron shifter ring (which had 80% wear) which engages the sleeve with the drum shaft.  This 
occurred because the shifter ring’s control lever was not fully elevated although it was locked secure.  
 

 
The  picture  at  left  shows  the  worn  shifter  ring  as  a  result  of  the  allowable 
movement  of  the  sleeve  due  to  the  2cm  play  in  the  lever  locking  assembly. 
This  picture  clearly  demonstrates  the  quantity  of  wear  on  the  shifter  ring.  
Approximately 80 % of the ring had been worn down in about 5 months.  The 
last  ring  was  changed  out  after  5  years  in  service.    A  2  cm  space  existed 
between  the  lever  and  its  seating  position  allowing  play  in  the  shifter  lock 
assembly. This space allowed the coupling sleeve to slowly back off the drum 
shaft until it finally disengaged allowing the blocks to fall.    See Fig. 2 below. 

 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Ensure  the  entire  linkage  system  between  the  electric  auxiliary  brake  and  the  drawworks  drum  shaft 
(including  shifter  ring,  control  lever,  coupling  sleeve,  etc.)  has  safety  critical  status  on  the  Preventive 
Maintenance System.  

•  Manufacturer was contacted for more detailed information on the installation of coupling (sleeve, control 
ring,  lever,  etc)  and  alignment  of  shafts.    In  addition  maintenance  information  was  obtained  on  the 
frequency and details of visual checks for correct engagement of the coupling sleeve, acceptable level of 
wear on the ring assembly, and measurement specifications on the shaft splines.  

•  Maintenance  supervisors  are  to  update  PMS  for  the  electric  auxiliary  brake/drawworks  linkage  system 

with additional information obtained from the Manufacturer. 

•  Ensure  that  adequate  maintenance  history  of  electric  auxiliary  brake/drawworks  linkage  system  is 

•  Ensure that sleeve and shift ring assembly follows a strict, structured greasing program to minimize wear 

detailed and updated in PMS.  

on ring and splines.  

Fig. 2. Showing linkage system between drum and electric brake shafts and how coupling sleeve 
backed off drum shaft and wearing away ring assembly.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Auxiliary 
Electric Brake 
Spline Shaft  

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2007 

