 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FATALITY – PIPE HANDLING CATWALK MACHINE   

Alert 2-18 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A floorhand was caught between a pipe handling catwalk machine and a stanchion post on the drill 
floor of a dynamically positioned drillship.  The operation at the time of the incident was picking up pipe 
from the pipe handling catwalk machine, making up at the rotary table, and running in the hole.  The 
floorhand was positioned in a step back area adjacent to where the pipe handling catwalk machine 
enters / exits the drill floor.  
 
The floorhand moved out of the step back area and stood next to a stanchion post adjacent to the pipe 
handling catwalk machine with his back to the well center.  As the catwalk operator moved the catwalk 
machine away from well center, the floorhand was caught between the platform of the catwalk machine 
and the stanchion post.  The floorhand subsequently died from his injuries. 

 

   

 

 
  
 

 
 

  

 

 

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

 
 
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 

 
 
The immediate cause of the incident was the employee was caught between the loading platform of the 
catwalk machine (moving object) and the stanchion post (stationary object).  
 
All installations to review this Safety Alert with all personnel, including discussions on proximity to 
LESSONS LEARNED: 
danger. 
 

  Review arrangements and markings for Restricted Access / Safe Areas.  Ensure such areas 
consider line of fire and proximity to danger, as well as clear access into and out of the area. 

  Review all moving plant and machinery for similar caught between and proximity to danger 

hazards. Ensure Controlled / Rig Procedures and Risk Assessments reference the presence of 
such hazards. 

  Review the presence and positioning of manually activated emergency stop buttons on moving 

plant and machinery. 

machinery is moving. 

  Consider the use of proximity barriers to prevent personnel access to areas where plant and 

  Consider audible and visual alarms for plant and machinery that moves. 

 

 

 

 

 
 

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

