Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 20  
 

HELIDECK OBSTRUCTION HAZARD: MARKING AND NOTIFICATION 

 
ISSUE:   
 
A  recent  fatal  helicopter  crash  has  highlighted  the  need  for  effective  coordination  of  information  between 
offshore  facility  operators  and  aviation  service  providers  (ASPs)  regarding  helideck  obstructions  and 
closures. 
 
As  with most incidents, there  were multiple barriers  which,  had any  one of them been  effectively managed 
and  in  place,  could  have  prevented  the  incident.    One  such  barrier,  which  is  under  the  control  of  the 
management  of  the  offshore  facility,  is  the  effective  identification  of  possible  obstructions  to  the  helideck, 
declaring  the  helideck  closed,  properly  marking  its  closure,  and  notifying  aviation  service  providers  of  the 
helideck’s  closure.    In  this  incident  the  pilot  attempted  to  land  on  the  helideck  of  a  platform  that  was  not 
marked as closed, even though it was apparently obstructed by a jackup that was working over the platform.  
It is not known why the pilot attempted to land on the platform’s helideck instead of that of the MODU, or that 
the  pilot  did  not  identify  that  the  flight  path  was  obstructed,  even  without  the  helideck  being  marked  as 
closed.  After the incident, the platform’s management did mark the helideck as closed. 
 
DISCUSSION:  
 
The  Limited  Obstacle  Sector  (LOS)  of  a  helideck  is  normally  marked  on  the  helideck.    However,  routine 
MODU  or  platform  operations  can  cause  obstructions  to  helidecks  or  impinge  on  a  helideck’s  LOS  or 
obstacle free sector with the potential to adversely impact flight safety.  These include, but are not limited to: 
 
•  Locating a MODU in a position such that the  unit’s structure obstructs the flight path to the helideck of 

another offshore facility; 
 

•  Locating  the  MODU  in  a  position  that  obstructs  the  areas  below  the  helideck  of  another  facility,  which 
should be kept clear in order to provide a clear flight path for a helicopter that may abort a landing or not 
gain full lift on take-off; 
 

•  Locating  a MODU  in  a position such that  its own helideck  is obstructed by a structure on  or below  the 

platform; 
 

 

•  Allowing  vessels  to  occupy  a  position  that  obstructs  the  area  below  the  helideck  of  their  own  unit  or 
another nearby facility, which should be kept clear in order to provide a clear flight path for a helicopter 
that may abort a landing or not gain full lift on take-off;  
 

•  Having the booms of cranes that have the ability to enter into the limited obstacle sector of a helideck;  

•  Placing unauthorized material or equipment on the helideck that causes an obstruction. 
 
A  helideck  that  is  obstructed  should  be  taken  out  of  service  and  marked  in  accordance  with  applicable 
regulatory requirements or standards.  The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) has established 
standards  for  limiting  obstacles  in  way  of  helidecks  and  for  marking  helidecks  as  closed.   While  the  ICAO 
standards  are  only  applicable  to  “international”  aviation,  their  standards  (often  with  modifications)  are 
commonly reflected in national regulations or industry standards, the most comprehensive of which is the UK 
Civil Aviation Authority’s CAP 437, Standards for Offshore Helicopter Landing Areas. 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2012 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ACTION RECOMMENDED: 
 
Before  moving  a  MODU  onto  a  new  operating  location,  an  assessment  should  be  made  regarding  the 
possibility that the unit, or its structure, could impinge on the limited obstacle areas of other offshore facilities 
in the area; or that the structure of such facilities may impinge on the limited obstacle areas of the MODU’s 
own helideck. 
 
For  MODUs  involved  in  combined  operations,  the  bridging  arrangements  between  the  MODU  and  the 
associated facility should clearly identify if a helideck on either the MODU or the facility is to be taken out of 
service.  The bridging arrangements should also make provisions for communication of information regarding 
operations on one installation that may necessitate, or warrant, the temporary closure of the helideck on the 
other  installation,  such  as  the  potential  for  temporary  obstructions  posed  by  crane  or  vessel  operations,  or 
certain critical operations (e.g., involving explosives for perforating operations). 
 
Regulatory  authorities,  aviation  search  and  rescue  services  and  ASPs  should  be  notified  of  any  helideck 
closures in accordance with appropriate procedures for the area of operation; and all closed helidecks should 
be marked appropriately. 
 
The following references are available for further information:  
 
•  National civil aviation regulations 
 
•  UK Civil Aviation Authority 

o  CAP 437 – Standards For Offshore Helicopter Landing Areas - [link] 

 
•  HSAC (United States) Recommended Practices – [link] 

o  92-1 - Helideck / Heliport Operational Hazard Warning(s) Procedure(s) 
o  92-4 - Gas Venting, Helideck/heliport Operational Hazard Warning(s) Procedure(s) 
o  92-5 - Closed Helidecks/Heliports, Helideck/Heliport Operational Hazard Warning(s) Procedure(s) 
o  2004-1 - Offshore Helideck Inspections 
o  2004-7 - Helideck Hazards 
o  2008-1 - Gulf of Mexico Helideck Markings 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
o 

ICAO Convention, Annex 14, Volume II (Heliports) 

International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (OGP) 
o  Aviation Management Guide 

 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

 

International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
o  Code for the Construction and Equipment of Mobile Offshore Drilling Units, 2009, Chapter 13 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2012 

