Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 03 
 

“STRUCK BY” INCIDENT RESULTS IN LEG INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew was getting the rig ready for cementing.  A large piece of PVC pipe, which is normally used to 
bypass the shakers, could not be found.  Two crew members were instructed to use a section of old casing 
as a substitute for the PVC pipe.  One crew member used a forklift to lift the section out of the junk box, while 
the  second  crew  member  stood  by  as  a  flagger.    The  forklift  operator  then  proceeded  to  stab  through  the 
inside circumference of the casing.  As the forklift operator lifted the casing, it caught the lip of the junk box, 
was knocked off of the fork, and fell to the ground.  As the section of casing fell, it struck the flagger in the leg 
resulting in a large abrasion. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Missing PVC pipe resulted in using casing as substitute. 
• 
•  The injured crew member was standing to close to the lifting operation and not paying sufficient attention 

Improper lifting – stabbed though casing instead of using a chain to lift the casing. 

to notify the forklift operator that load was getting hung up on edge of box. 

•  No JSA had been completed prior to the task. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company counseled and trained all rig personnel on the use of JSAs and forklift safety. 
•  The company reminded all rig personnel to use a chain when lifting. 
•  The company counseled all employees on their responsibility to account for and properly maintain all rig 

equipment needed for various operations. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2014 

