Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 06  
 

NEAR-HIT INCIDENT - DROPPED OBJECT PIPE HANDLING PUSH-ARM FELL 

TO THE RIG FLOOR 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While drilling a 12 ¼” hole, the driller observed the unused Safety Push Arm fall 15 feet (4.5 meters) onto the 
rig floor just in front of the Driller’s cabin.  The arm caused dents to the rig floor cover plates.  There were five 
(5)  rig  floor  workers  in  the  vicinity  working  near  the  V-Door,  but  luckily  no  one  was  injured  and  no  other 
equipment was damaged.  The piece of equipment that fell measured 12’ 6” long and 8” X 8” wide, weighing 
882lbs.  It had the potential to cause fatalities.   

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  An investigation revealed that the 882lb arm was held onto the davit by a 1 ½” long bolt.  The short bolt 

did not allow a sufficient number of threads to screw into the support structure.   
 

The amount of thread that held it in its place 
 

 

The amount of thread that held it in place 

 

  There was no secondary retention (safety sling) installed on the arm to arrest a potential fall. 
  Once it was decided to discontinue use of the equipment, there was no decision whether to remove or to 

re-use the equipment. 

  Vibration of the rig may have contributed to the bolt unscrewing from the support structure. 
  The failed equipment was installed the after initial rig-up and was not included in the derrick’s inspection 

checklist, nor was it included in the Toolpusher’s weekly checklist. 

  The failed equipment was installed after the DROPS survey was conducted; therefore it was not included 

  There was no record of the last inspection of the failed equipment including maintenance and greasing. 
  There  was  no  way  to  visibly  inspect  the  bolt  inside  the  slot  to  see  if  the  thread  was  still  in  place  and 

in the DROPS survey list. 

properly engaged. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The failed equipment has been removed from service before any further operations were conducted.   
  A notice has been sent to the manufacturer to alert them of this incident indicating the reason for failure. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2011 

 

 

 

 
 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
  Rig supervisors were instructed that all new equipment that is to be installed at heights shall always have 
an  installation  procedure  prepared  and  documented  in  the  company  maintenance  program  prior  to 
installation.  This documentation is to include the following information: 

A. Secondary retention is a part of the installation procedure. 
B. Maintenance procedure is prepared and added into the company preventative maintenance system. 
C. Equipment documented and included in the derrick inspection checklist. 
D. Equipment documented and included in the DROPS program. 

 
  There shall be a rotation of personnel performing derrick inspections (with the goal that a fresher pair of 

eyes might see something that has been missed) 
Instructed  rig  supervisors  that  all  crew  members  shall  be  reminded  of  the  importance  of  performing 
quality  inspections,  including  important  points,  as  well  as  giving  examples  at  Weekly  Safety  Meetings 
and during Pre-Tour Meetings. 

The 882lb arm that fell from the derrick 

The davit that held the arm 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2011 

