Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 29 
 

PERSONNEL HOIST STUCK IN “HOIST” POSITION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During operations to slip and cut drilling line, crewman was being hoisted on a Personnel Hoist to remove a 
dead  man  centralizer  on  the  drilling  line.    The  directional  control  handle  on  the  Personnel  Hoist  became 
detached causing a loss of control of the winch in the hoisting mode.  To prevent further uncontrolled ascent, 
the air isolation valve was closed, shutting off the air supply to the winch.  The control handle was reinstalled 
and operations resumed. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The Personnel Hoist was not inspected before use.   
•  Safety meeting (JSA) did not include inspection of the winch’s operating lever.   
•  The Personnel Hoist was not included on the Preventive Maintenance list.   
•  Not everyone knew where the air isolation valve was located.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

Rig Supervisors remember:  

 

 

This incident shows the importance of the company’s Preventive Maintenance Program and everyone 
knowing the safety systems designed into every piece of equipment. 

• 

It is important to include the Personnel Hoist and other winches in the PM program.  Be sure to add 
“Inspect condition and check operation of control lever” to the rig’s hoisting equipment PM Program.   

•  Operators should do a visual inspection of the Personnel Hoist before operating.   
•  Everyone needs to know where the air supply isolation valve is located.  The newer Personnel Hoists 

come with an air supply isolation valve and remote isolation valve (the driller’s console would be a good 
location for the backup isolation valve).  Include the location of the air supply isolation valve in your pre-
job safety meetings involving the Personnel Hoist activities.   

•  Hold Pre-Job safety meeting (JSA) before hoisting personnel.  In the safety meeting it is important to 

o  The unexpected can and will happen.   
o  Consider the worse thing that can happen in carrying out the tasks with the equipment being 

consider:   

used.  

 Visually inspect your hoisting equipment on a daily basis and each time before lifting 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2007 

