Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 10 
 

WELDING OPERATION RESULTS IN A FIRE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig was in the shipyard for upgrades and repair.  At the time 
of the fire, the shipyard crew was preparing leg #3 chord-B for 
the  installation  of  an  additional  section  of  leg.    The  shipyard 
crew was working inside a welding tent that was made of light-
weight tarps.  The workers were grinding the mating surface of 
the  leg  when  sparks  created  by  the  grinder  ignited  the  tent 
surrounding the leg.  The shipyard fire watchman attempted to 
extinguish  the  fire  using  the  dry  powder  fire  extinguisher while 
the fire fighting team connected the main deck fire hose to the 
manifold and sent it up to him.  Once the fire watchman had the 
hose,  the  Crane  Operator  (Fire  Team  Leader)  opened  the  fire 
hydrant  valve  on  the  main  deck.    He  found  that  there  was  no 
water  pressure  at  the  hydrant  so  he  went  down  to  the  Rig 
Engineer’s  area  and  manually  opened  the  fresh  water  pump 
valve linking it to the fire manifold on the main deck.  With water 
to the hose, the fire was successfully extinguished. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The  JSA  obtained  for  the  task  was  generic  for  “general 
welding  and  cutting”  (generic  JSA).    A  JSA  for  gouging  at 
leg #3 chord-B was not completed, therefore the hazard of 
gouging with a light-weight tarp tent was not recognized.  

  Safety-critical  equipment  was  not  connected/online.    The 
fire  pump  could  not  automatically  kick  in  because  the  fire 
pump  circuit  breaker  was  being  used  for  the  fresh  water 
pump on the jetty.  

  Supervisory  personnel  onboard  the  rig  didn’t  understand 
their  roles  and  responsibilities  for  “Control  of  Work”.    The 
gouging  activity  was  not  reviewed  prior  to  the  task 
commencing.    The  risks  of  using  a  non-fire  retardant  tent 
were not recognized and properly controlled. 

  Recovery  measures  were  inadequate  (fire  hydrant  not 

ready for automatic service). 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Generic JSA’s are an aid only and should not be relied upon for all tasks.  Each task must have its own 

  Safety-critical equipment should not be disabled without a Permit To Work (PTW) approved by the 

job-specific JSA. 

Senior Toolpusher. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2010 

 

 

