Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 24 
 

HIGH POTENTIAL DROPPED OBJECT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  normal  drilling  operations  a  dropped  object  consisting  of  a  tong  bucket  counterweight  weighing 
approx. 8 -10 lbs fell from the mast.  The Driller heard noises coming from above and looked up and saw a 
object falling.  He immediately yelled to the Floormen to stand back.  The Floormen all moved and stood to 
the side of the rig floor.  The counterweight landed on the rig floor beside the rotary table on the Driller’s side.  
It bounced approximately 6 feet and landed on the rotary table.  No injuries were incurred as a result of this 
High Potential Near Miss incident.  The Operation was shut down and an investigation conducted. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  Site  Welder  had  failed  to  correctly  secure  the  additional  tong  counter  weight  segments.    There  was  a 
failure  by  Supervisors  to  recognize  and  calculate  the  difference  in  the  height  of  segments  that  ultimately 
caused the weights to protrude from the counter weight bucket.  No pre-task safety meeting was conducted 
and  a  potentially  hazardous  situation  was  not  recognized.    The  Rig’s  Supervisors  did  not  implement  a 
Management  of  Change  (MOC)  plan  for  change-out  of  equipment.    The  changing  of  the  tongs  was 
conducted  by  the  Floormen  on  the  rig  floor  under  the  supervision  of  the  Driller,  Assistant  Driller  and  Rig 
Manager.    None  of  these  personnel  were  aware  of  the  potential  dangers  associated  with  replacing  the 
existing tongs with a newer and heavier set. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The new tongs were replaced with the old tongs until the counter weights were safely modified to ensure 

positioning stability. 

•  Tongs were replaced and counterweights were modified (MPI Certified). 
•  An  investigation  was  conducted  and  a  meeting  was  conducted  to  discuss  the  incident  and  make  all 
personnel aware of the potential for serious injury/fatality on a routine decision to change out tongs and 
make additions to the tong counter weights. 

•  Ensure  that  the  inspection  process  be  included  in  the  Rig  Site  Dropped  Objects  Management  System 

(DOMS). 

 

Tong  counter  weight  segment  landed  beside  rotary 
table and bounced a further 5-6 feet. 
 
 

Corrective action towards securing tong counterweight 
segments 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2007 

