Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 07 
 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

UNSAFE HOISTING & RIGGING PRACTICE 

 

 

 

 

The monkey board assembly was being removed from the derrick during the rig out stage of the operation; 
the derrick was in the horizontal position. Two gin pole trucks were positioned on either side of the derrick 
with slings secured to the bottom skid of the monkey board assembly. Three workers had positioned 
themselves inside the monkey board assembly to remove the pins, which secured the monkey board 
assembly to the derrick. When the last pin was removed, the monkey board assembly flipped 180 degrees 
and contacted the ground. The three workers were thrown from their positions inside the monkey board 
assembly, to the ground. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Unsafe Hoisting & Rigging  
Application of the lifting slings did not address the issue of identifying the center of gravity on the attempted 
lift of the monkey board assembly.  
Unsafe Design  
Design allows workers to be exposed to a hazardous risk on a suspended load during the removal or 
installation of the monkey board assembly.  
Taking an Unsafe Position  
Three workers positioned themselves on and inside the monkey board assembly (suspended load).  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to 
rig personnel: 

Hoisting any rig load with gin pole trucks requires knowledge of the fundamentals of rigging.  
Before any lift is attempted a "Basic Rigging Plan" must be in place. The "Plan" must address the following 
questions:  

(cid:131) Who is responsible (competent) for the rigging?  
(cid:131) Communication established?  
(cid:131) Is the equipment in acceptable condition? Appropriate type? Proper identification?  
(cid:131) Are the working loads adequate? What is the weight of the load? Where is the center of gravity?  
(cid:131) What is the sling angle? Will there be any angular or side loading?  
(cid:131) Will the load be under control? Is the load rigged to the center of gravity? Clear of personnel?  
(cid:131) Special requirements? 

 

At all times, the specific work activity being performed must be under the immediate supervision of an 
authorized person who has the authority to commence, modify, or cease the work methods or operations, 
necessary, to ensure the safety of affected personnel. The authorized person must observe changing 
conditions and improve, whenever required, the work methods to promote increased protection for the 
personnel.  
Under no circumstances is anyone to work on or under a suspended load. (CAODC Rig Move Reference 
Manual).  
Engineer a safe system for the installation and removal of the monkey board assembly, to eliminate the 
positioning of workers exposed to the hazardous risk of completing a task on a suspended load.  
 
IADC Note:  Refer to IADC HSE Reference Guide Section 8 and Alert 99-14, 04-03.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2005 

