 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SAFETY ALERTS 

ALERT 4 – 17    

Drill Pipe Screen lodging in Top Drive results in Near Hit 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
There have been several incidents in which the drill pipe screen has become lodged in the Top Drive following a 
pressure release of the Mud Pump Pressure Relief System (Pop Off). In some cases the screen dislodged from the 
Top Drive while traveling overhead, resulting in a significant near hit. 

WHAT WERE CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 

An increase in downhole pressure forced the Pop Off system to release. The Pop Off releasing caused mud to 
travel back up the drill string lodging the drill pipe screen into the Top Drive.  

The screen was observed to be missing in the drill pipe while the ring around the screen remained seated in 
the  box  end  of  the  tool  joint.   It  was  assumed  the  drill  pipe  screen  had  traveled  down  hole  and  was  not 
identified as a potential overhead hazard/dropped object. Employees failed to recognize the potential for the 
drill pipe screen to be lodged in the Top Drive becoming an Overhead Hazard. 

This  condition  can  also  occur  from  the  negative  internal  pressure  (vacuum)  created  by  activities  such  as 
bleeding off the 2” valve on the standpipe manifold. 

LESSONS LEARNED: 

1.  The Rig Manager shall ensure each employee understands the expectation involving a Pop Off 

release and missing drill pipe screens during drilling operations. 

2.  The Rig Manager will partner with the Operator Representative during instances involving Pop 

Offs and missing drill pipe screens to locate and verify any Overhead Hazard has been mitigated 
before resuming drilling operations. 
 
Immediately following a Pop Off release, the Driller shall communicate with their crew to discuss 
the potential hazard and ensure crews locate the drill pipe screen at the next connection. 

3. 

 

4.  When a missing drill pipe screen is identified during drilling operations, crews shall stop the job 

and notify the Driller and Rig Manager of the potential hazard. 

5.  While attempting to locate the missing drill pipe screen following a Pop Off release, crews shall 
always assume that the drill pipe screen may have been forced into the Top Drive until verified 
otherwise. 

-A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or 

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

