Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 17 
 

LINE-OF-FIRE INCIDENT RESULTS IN FACIAL INJURIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew was attempting to manually latch a running tool onto the top of a tubing liner pump down hole.  
The crew installed a rod wheel onto the rod string.  Employees, on the rig floor, held 10 to 15 turns of torque 
into  the  rod  string  with  the  wheel  as  the  rod  string  was  lifted.    The  running  tool  detached  from  the  lock 
assembly thus causing the workers to lose their grip on the rod wheel.  The release of torque caused the rod 
wheel to backspin in an uncontrolled manner.  While spinning, the gate piece of the rod wheel broke away 
from the main body of the wheel and, struck a worker in the face, which resulted in major facial injuries. 
 

The gate piece of the rod wheel broke away, striking a 

worker. 

A new rod wheel 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Defective tools: The rod wheel is made of plastic.   
• 
• 

If the rod wheel backspins from torque, the gate in the wheel is subject to failure. 
Improper procedures: There was no safe method of placing torque into a rod string using a rod wheel.  If 
control of the wheel is lost, the resulting backspin places workers at risk from disintegration of the gate. 

•  There  are  no  manufacturer  operating  specifications  for  the  rod  wheel  that  helps  to  identify  the  torque 

limitations or maximum number of turns on a rod string before it becomes a hazard. 

•  Use of a rod wheel relies on the workers manually holding a device with torque applied and, if they lose 

control of the wheel and it fails, there is no way to protect the workers. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Recommended  engineering  control:  The  use  of  jaw-type  rod  tong  dies  coupled  with  a  backup  arm  to 

rotate the rod string removes the hazard to workers. 

 
Credit to: Enform Safety Alert SA-2014-08 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2014 

