Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 09 
 

UNSECURED LOAD RESULTS IN AN INJURED EMPLOYEE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Rig crews utilizing trucks and a crane were in the process of rigging up.  The pony subs were set and the top 
subs stacked.  The crane set the first substructure spreader in place, however, the spreader did not set down 
into the substructure pin ears all the way.  At this time the crane line was unhooked from the spreader.  This 
action resulted in an overhead load (i.e., the spreader) not being secured.  It is not clear who instructed the 
crane swamper  to disconnect  the crane  line  from  the  spreader.   A  gin  truck was  hooked on to  the  driller’s 
side  substructure  at  the  bottom  and  onto  one  side  of  the  load  hitch.    When  the  gin  truck  lifted  the 
substructure it spread the substructure more than expected letting the spreader fall through the substructure 
to the ground.  Two employees were on the ground below the spreader when it fell.  They were looking up to 
see  what  needed  to  be  done  to  allow  the  spreader  to  set  in  place  so  the  pins  could  be  installed.    One 
employee was able to move out of harms way.  The other employee was struck by the spreader and knocked 
into the cellar resulting in a severe injury.  A cellar cover was not in place. 
 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
There was a failure to follow procedures detailed in the “Safe Work Procedures Handbook”.  The company’s 
handbook states:  “All personnel to stand clear of all overhead work.” 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The company policy on over head loads is very clear and specific.  This includes all suspended loads 
and all overhead loads that are not yet secured.  
 
1.  Do not unhook from a suspended load until it is secured.  Once secured approval for unhooking must be 

given by the supervisor overseeing the operation.  

2.  Top pins should be installed first.  This will secure the load before installing the bottom pins from 

underneath. 

3.  The company’s truck supervisor, rig manager or driller should be supervising rig-up of the substructure 

assembly. One of these supervisors is responsible for directing ALL aspects of the job including 
authorization for unhooking from the load. 

4.  A cellar cover is to be installed before assembling the substructure.   
5.  These incidents will continue to occur unless we STOP AND THINK. 
6.  ALL employees have the responsibility to observe fellow crew members and STOP UNSAFE ACTS 

IMMEDIATELY and teach the correct procedure and sequence. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
7.  Rig managers are to ensure this Safety Alert is reviewed with each crew member. A pre-tour safety 

meeting is a good opportunity to conduct and document the review.  The Safety Alert should be posted in 
the top doghouse. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

