Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT - EMPLOYEE STRUCK BY SLING 

 
ALERT 05 – 02 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

A serious incident occurred on a Jackup Drilling rig when an employee was struck in the head by the eye of a 
¾” stainless steel sling, resulting in a skull fracture and multiple sutures to the face and hand.  The crew was 
in the process of picking-up and laying-down the #3 Deep Well Pump.  A nylon sling was secured to the 6” 
deep well hose, and the hose was lifted 50 ft through the opening on the main deck.  The power supply cable 
and the safety cable for the deep well pump were tied to the deep well hose with a ½” manila rope.  As the 
hose was lifted the rope parted.  As the cables fell through the hole on the main deck the eye on the end of 
the safety cable struck the employee on the forehead rendering him unconscious.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Several  company  safety  management  systems  such  as  JSA,  PTW,  and  Safe  Work  Practices  were  not 
properly followed.  These systems were being used as a “check the box,” instead of an important tool so that 
hazards are discussed, identified and managed.  The crew had reviewed a JSA, but the JSA was for the #1& 
#2 deep wells, which are located over the side of the rig.  The #3 deep well poses different hazards because 
of its location, and those hazards were not recognized or managed.  The JSA used did identify several safety 
critical  steps  such  as  “inspect  rigging  and  equipment,”  but  these  safety  steps  were  ignored.    Inadequate 
inspection of the rigging used to lift the pump and secure the auxiliary cables.  The nylon sling used to lift the 
hose was not fit for purpose and showed severe wear and damage.  A permit was also issued, but an Area 
Supervisor was not assigned to oversee the operation, or to ensure that company Safe Work practices were 
adhered to.  Although a JSA and PTW were completed, the principal safety systems, which are in place to 
prevent this type of incident from occurring, were not enforced.  Rig personnel were not following the PTW 
and JSA procedure in the company’s procedures manual.  When the deep well tower was removed 8 years 
earlier, rig personnel did not attach permanent brackets and fasteners to secure the power supply cable and 
safety cable to the 6” hose.  Instead, rope was used to hold these cables to the deep well hose.  Inadequate 
Risk  Assessment  -  rope  was  used  in  place  of  brackets  and  fasteners,  and  unfortunately  this  was  an 
acceptable practice with rig personnel.  Reference the company manual on rigging (Rigging Module, Fiber 
Rope, and for proper application of fiber rope). 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

Action Items (Rig) 

The Safety Committee for each rig will review all JSAs and identify specialty lifts (installation of boat ropes, 
take-on  hoses,  deepwell  installation,  etc.).    After  identification,  each  JSA  must  be  reviewed  by  the  Safety 
Committee to ensure that the rigging utilized in these operations is specified in the JSA and is fit for purpose 
for the intended job.  Due Date: 30-Jan-2005 
Action Items (Management) 
There have been several incidents recently where rope failed while supporting weight.  The Operations and 
HSE Departments are currently revising the procedures manual section on Rigging Module, Fiber Rope so 
the allowable applications for fiber rope are clearly defined.  Due Date: 15-Jan-2005 

Operations  and  HSE  Departments  will  develop  a  company  approved  rigging  and  support  system  for 
running submersible pumps over the side.  Due Date: 15-Jan-2005  

This incident is still under investigation, further information may follow. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2005 

