Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 35  
 

DROPPED OBJECT (DRIFT RABBIT) RESULTS IN RWC 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While lowering the drift rabbit down “V” door by air winch, the drift slipped off the winch’s hoist line It slid down 
the V-door slide striking injured person’s finger resulting in a Restricted Work Case.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  investigation  revealed  that  a  welding  rod  had  been  used  to  secure  the  Rabbit  to  the  winch’s  line  rather 
than using the proper attachment (hook).  The injured person had positioned himself in line with the path of the 
load being lowered.  It was also found that the winch operator was not experienced (trained) in the operation of 
the winch. 
 
As personnel were not aware of the dropped object hazard involved with lifting rabbit by air winch there was an 
apparent lack of safety awareness by the task supervisor and in the pre-job safety meeting. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed Supervisors and personnel:   
 
•  Using  proper  equipment  for  the  job,  lifting  operations  with  a  potentiality  of  dropped  object  must  be 
proceeded with a pre job safety meeting and a JSA to ensure all personnel are aware of hazards involved 
and positioned to avoid being struck by a dropped object. 

•  The  winch  operator  should  be  an  experienced  employee  who  is  trained  in  the  safe  operation  of  the  air 

•  The operator must remain at the controls of the air winch at all times when a load is being lowered, raised 

winch.  

or held in the air.   

•  Supervisors are to correct unsafe acts and stop the job when they are deemed unsafe. 

 
 
IADC Note:  See Alerts” 00 – 31” and “02 – 03”  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2002 

