Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

ALERT 04 – 23 
 

DISCHARGE OF SYNTHETIC BASED MUD OVERBOARD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Approximately  60  barrels  of  Synthetic  Based  Mud  (SBM)  was  discharged  overboard  when  the  trip  tank 
overflowed. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
While tripping out of the hole and arriving at the BHA, a flow check was performed prior to pulling BHA through 
the  BOPs.    After  no  flow  was  confirmed  the  trip  tank  was  filled  by  the  mud  mixing  pump.    When  an  alarm 
sounded in the Driller’s shack, the AD acknowledged the alarm but did not notice that the alarm was sounding 
for a full trip tank.  The trip tank continued to fill until it overflowed, causing approximately 135 barrels of SBM 
to overflow the boundary containment and allowing approximately 60 barrels to be discharged overboard. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
Directives  
 
•  The Driller is to ensure that there is proper monitoring of all mud transfers.  
•  Ensure  that  all  visual  and  audible  alarms  on  all  mud  control  and  return  systems/tanks  are  functioning 

• 

properly.  
Inspect tank overflow return lines on all similar tanks to ensure they are of sufficient diameter to cope with 
the flow rate of fluid in the event of an overflow.  

•  Ensure that mud loggers are correctly monitoring level alarms and that they communicate any variations to 

•  Rigs  are  to  verify  that  any  alarm  specific  to  mud/volume/flow/gain/loss/trip  tank  are  separated  from  any 

•  The alarm should be readily distinguishable from others either by sound or visual indication, whichever is 

the Driller.  

other “common alarm”.  

applicable. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2004 

