Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 05 – 38 
 

LADDER INCIDENT - DRILLER FRACTURES BACK AND WRIST IN FALL 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  driller  was  positioned  on  an  extension  ladder  inside  the  drilling  rig’s  substructure.  He  was  attempting  to 
tighten a fitting on a hydraulic hose with an 18-inch pipe wrench.  The wrench slipped off the fitting, causing 
the driller to lose his footing on the ladder and fall to the rig matting below.  The distance of the fall was less 
than three meters (9.8 feet); the pipe wrench was in good working order, there were no slippery substances 
on the rungs of the ladder; and the driller’s footwear was in good condition. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The driller took an unsafe position on the ladder.  He did not have one hand available to hold onto the ladder 
or other support (i.e., fall protection).  As a result, he was not following proper procedures for completing a 
task  inside  the  rig  substructure  while  working  at  a  potentially  unsafe  height,  below  three  meters,  on  an 
extension ladder.  

Contributing Factors:  

The driller was also not in compliance with the company’s Fall Protection Policy.  This policy states that “All 
workers shall use the fall protection systems when working at a height above three meters (9.8 feet) or if a 
falling hazard exists.”  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  Create  a  Job  Safety  Analysis  (JSA)  on  “Working  in  the  Cellar  while  at  Heights,”  and  review  with  all 
personnel the risks of working at potentially unsafe heights. Serious injuries may occur when falling from 
less than three meters.  

•  Attach/weld  engineered  5,000-pound-rated  lug  for  fall  protection  in  strategic  areas  inside  the 
substructure. These anchor points will optimize the fall protection system for completing tasks inside the 
substructure while working at potentially unsafe heights.  

•  Evaluate  all  rigs  in  fleet  for  working  at  a  potentially  unsafe  height  hazard  (falls  from  less  than  three 

meters) and provide mitigation.  

•  Reinforce  the  company’s  present  and  ongoing  plan  in  proactive  risk  assessment  through  the  use  of 

hazard identification tools (JSAs and the Do-It Program).  

•  Promote  the  performance  of  a  Basic  Risk  Assessment.  Before  starting  any  task,  workers  should  ask 

these four questions:  
1.  What could go wrong?  
2.  How could that affect me/us?  
3.  What can I/we do about it?  
4.  Will my/our actions create other problems?  

 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to Alerts:  99-14, 99-16, 02-19,  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2005 

