Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 34  
 

SAFETY LANYARD NEAR MISS INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  tripping  pipe  in  the  hole  one  floorman  went  down  to  the  BOP  Stack  to  assemble  the  clamp  on  the 
rotating  head.    Before  he  came  down  from  the  stack,  the  driller  rotated  the  rotary  table  to  make  up  a 
connection.    The  floorman’s  safety  lanyard  nearly  became  entangled  in  the  rotating  head.    The  floorman 
screamed out and the driller stopped the rotation.  
 
Last year, a fatal incident occurred when a Technician working on another rig got his safety lanyard caught in 
the rotating head.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  Driller  started  rotation  before  ensuring  that  the  floorman  and  his  lanyard  were  safely  away  from  the 
rotating head.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Issued the following directive to all rigs:   
 
•  Any personnel working on the BOP Stack during drilling operations must have a work permit.  

If a rotating head is being used, then no work can occur without all equipment being Locked Out/ Tagged 
Out.    This  includes  Rotary  Table,  Drawworks  (unless  under  Work  Permit)  and  any  other  energized 
equipment which could affect this task.  

•  Personnel involved in task shall perform a JSA prior to beginning the task. 

•  All personnel shall be instructed on LockOut/TagOut and Work Permits. 

•  All Training shall be documented and kept on the rig. 

• 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2002 

