Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 06 – 09  
 

FALL WHILE RIGGING DOWN RESULTS IN A DISLOCATED SHOULDER (MTO) 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew was preparing for a rig move and the mast had been laid down.  The Injured Person (IP) was 
attempting to rig up the wire slings at monkey board.  While the Injured Person (IP) was arranging one sling 
at  monkey  board  his  foot  slipped  down  about  3  FT  (1  meter)  causing  his  body  to  twist  and  his  left  hand 
caught on the upper finger of the monkey board.  This resulted in an interior dislocation of his left shoulder 
joint.  The IP received medical treatment (his shoulder was put back in place), and returned to work.  In the 
worst case scenario the IP could have experienced more serious body injuries or fatality. 

Improper position of the IP. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Lack of safety awareness / alertness.   
• 
•  Risk assessment not properly done / followed. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following to rig 
personnel: 
 
•  Safe  Job  Assessment  (SJA)  and  Permit  To  Work  (PTW)  programs  should  be  done  beforehand  and 

•  Safe  Job  Assessment  (SJA)  and  Permit  To  Work  (PTW)  should  also  include  all  recognized  and 

applied to non-routine jobs. 

potentially recognized risks and hazards. 

•  Proper Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) should be worn for the job. 
•  Supervisors  should  check  to  ensure  that  crewmen  fully  understand  the  task  and  all  necessary 

precautions while working as per the SJA and or PTW or other means of risk/hazard recognition.  

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2006 

