Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 23  
 

EXPLODING BALL VALVE RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig welder was instructed to cut a mild steel hose fitting from a 4 inch (10cm) brass ball valve.  Working 
at his bench with a hot work permit, the welder used an oxy-acetylene torch to cut the mild steel fitting close 
to the threaded  end of the valve.   Having finished  the job the  welder turned to  put  his torch away.   At this 
time an extremely loud explosion took place and a short threaded section of the valve closest to the cut fitting 
blew  across  the  lease,  hit  the  ground,  making  a  small  crater  approximately  26  feet  (8m)  away  from  the 
bench.    The  threaded  section  bounced  and  flew  another  39  feet  (12m),  hitting  and  denting  a  steel  cargo 
container. 
 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The valve had not been taken apart before the steel fitting was cut from the valve.  As the valve was in 
the  completely  open  position,  the  valve  seal  ensured  that  the  void  space  between  the  ball  and  the 
housing was completely enclosed. 
 

•  This valve had been in service in a water line; therefore, it is presumed that fluid inside the sealed void 

space between the housing and the ball was turned into steam by the heat of the cutting torch. 
 

•  The applied heat  also  allowed the  valve body to expand.   The built up pressure of the steam, coupled 
with  the  expansion  of  the  valve  body,  resulted  in  the  explosion  that  sent  the  smaller  part  of  the  valve 
across the lease. 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 
 

Instructed rig welders that all valves must be disassembled prior to hot work. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2012 

