Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

IMPROPER HAND PLACEMENT RESULTS IN MINOR INJURY 

 
ALERT 13 – 07  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 

While drilling ahead, two employees were assigned to rig up the wire line machine.  The attachment point for 
the  wire  line  sheave  is  located  under  the  transition  plate  between  the  hydraulic  catwalk  and  rig  floor  (the 
plate  hinges  away  from  the  floor).    The  two  employees,  together,  lifted  the  transition  plate  so  that  one 
employee could show the other where to hook up the wire line sheave.  After showing his co-worker where to 
install the sheave, they began to lower the transition plate back down.  One employee decided to let go of 
the plate as it was getting close to the floor.  The other employee had his right hand on the catwalk side of 
the plate and his left hand on the floor side.  To keep from mashing his fingers between the plate and floor, 
he  removed  his  left  hand  and  continued  to  lower  the  plate.    As  he  did,  he  felt  a  "pinch"  to  his  right  pinky 
finger, so  he jerked his  hand out  and  told the other  employee that he  thought he had injured  his finger.  It 
was  found  that  his  finger  got  caught  between  the  transition  plate  and  the  metal  plate  supporting  a  bearing 
housing. 
 

Employee’s finger caught in the pinch point. 

Left hand removed 
while lowering. 

Right hand was used 
to finish lowering the 
plate. 

Area where finger was caught. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 

 

 

 

 

•  A  general  walk  around  and  review  of  the  floor  plate,  v  door,  and  catwalk  did  not  reveal  the  hazard 

between the transition plate and the bearing plate. 

•  Both employees did not initiate the JSA / Hazard ID process prior to lifting the plate by hand. 
•  The employees raised the transition plate (i.e., pulled it from it horizontal position to a vertical position) to 

discuss installation of a wire line sheave. 

•  The employees did not use a hoist to raise the plate from its resting position to vertical. 
•  The manufacturer did not install a lifting eye, slot, or D-ring to attach to the transition plate to raise and 

lower it into position. 

•  The injured employee finished lowering the transition plate, by hand, after the other employee let go. 
•  Both employees did not communicate their intentions; one let go of the plate while the other held on.  
•  The injured employee did not utilize any tool to control the plate’s descent and he failed to keep his finger 

from contacting any other area (bearing plate or floor plate). 

•  The employee did not "let go" of the plate when it started getting too heavy to handle or when the other 

employee released the plate. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2013 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Employees  were  counseled  regarding  company  expectations  for  Job  Safety  Analysis  (JSA),  reminding 

them that Hazard ID is expected prior to performing any task. 

o  Critical Tasks require documented JSA with all affected persons. 
o  Non-critical tasks require Hazard ID, prior to performing the task.   

•  All  affected  personnel  were  reminded  that  fall  protection  (harness  and  lanyard)  is  required  when 

performing maintenance or similar tasks with the v-door gate open. 

•  The  transition  plate  is  under  review  to  determine  if  an  engineered  method  can  be  installed  to  provide 

employees with a means to safely lift the plate and to help prevent recurrence of this type of incident. 

•  A cable was attached to the pad eye so the plate does not have to be lifted to attach the sheave in the 

future; the plate will still need to be handled during Rig Up and Rig Down situations. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2013 

