Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 45 
 

MAN-RIDING OPERATION RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Rig night shift drilling crews were preparing the rig to commence drilling operations following a rig move.  
Part of this task is to set back the mast lifting line equalizing yoke.  This requires working at a height of 35 
meters (115 feet) above the rig floor. It was planned to be done with one man in the mast itself and one man 
on a man-riding winch, both assisting in tying the yoke back.  During this operation the cable supporting the 
victim fell off the snatch block hung underneath the crown assembly allowing the victim and the supporting 
cable to fall 35m (115 feet) to the rig floor.  The victim suffered multiple injuries and died on the spot.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The retaining bolt securing the cheek plate on the snatch block backed out.  The safety pin had not been 
installed.  The block had been subject to many activities during the preceding 8 hours which may have 
contributed to the backing out of the bolt. 

•  The deformed cheek plate had been subject to a load much greater than man-riding alone.  A stall pull 
with the winch would be powerful enough to deform this plate.  The rig had pulled out master-bushings 
preceding this incident. 

•  No secondary device in the form of a wire sling below the snatch block to catch the cable in the event of 

a catastrophic failure was installed at the snatch block in the derrick. 

•  The utility winch instead of the man-riding winch was used to lift the victim. 
•  A climbing belt was used instead of a man-riding harness.  No secondary fall device was used on this 

belt.  

•  No hazard awareness or control. The Permit-To-Work system was disregarded.  No meaningful Tool Box 

Talk was held or Job instructions were given.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives: 
 
•  Ensure a secondary retention device is fitted on all crown block sheaves. 
•  Review the Permit To Work system.  Is it really being used or a paper exercise? 
•  Rigging  up  safety  critical  equipment  is  a  Permit  To  Work  activity,  at  least  check  that  a  second  pair  of 

•  Be aware of the maximum pull your rig floor tugger can exert on the sheaves and shackles.  Remember 

eyes looks at all critical equipment.  

it is a pulley system, the pull is doubled.  

•  Assume the manufactures stall out pull unless you know its actual pull. 
•  Use  the  correct  man-riding  winch  and  an  approved  man-riding  (not  climbing)  harness  that  includes 

secondary fall device. 

•  Have a proper Tool Box Talk.  
•  Ask:  Is man-riding the only way to complete this task safely, is it the safest way? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

 
IADC Note:  Refer to IADC HSE Reference Guide Section 19, and Safety Alerts:  00-36, 01-02, 01-16, 02-23, 
02-32, 02-54, 03-18, 03-37, 05-01 
 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2005 

