 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

CAUSTIC BARREL STEAM / ACETYLENE CUTTING RESULTS  

IN AN INJURY 

 
ALERT 07 – 26 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

A  caustic  barrel  required  repair  for  a  seized  mixing  paddle.    The  barrel  was  flushed  for  30  minutes  then 
drained and sent to the Hot Work Area for repairs.  After the welder cut a rectangular window to access the 
shaft & paddles on the bottom he noticed a 2” thick hardened buildup of caustic on the bottom; he  assumed 
this was what was seizing up the paddles and used a piece of small square tubing to pry the paddles around.  
As he bent over to look inside vapor/steam escaped from the observation hole and covered the unprotected 
portions of his upper face.  

Position of worker just before he leaned 
down to look at the position of the 
square tubing which was being used to 
free the paddles and shaft. 

Drain Valve is located 1” above the bottom, so 
sediments will settle and eventually harden and 
cause the solid mass of Caustic. 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

The design of the barrel did not allow for complete draining and it appeared that improper rinsing after each 
use allowed caked/hardened caustic to gather at the base.  After cutting the inspection hole the hazard was 
seen although it was not identified and the operation continued.  After the exposure the worker did not spend 
sufficient time at the scene rinsing his face.  After reaching the medic the patient was told to go back to the 
Rig Eyewash Station, which exposed his skin to another two minutes of contact with the caustic.  The on site 
medic believed the skin flushing water needed a neutralizing agent to be effective and was not clear on how 
effective  immediate,  vigorous  irrigation  is  in  reducing  the  effects.    The  medic  was  not  aware  of  the 
emergency first aid treatment recommended on the MSDS sheet.  The sheet was provided to him while the 
incident was being handled. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

A Safety Meeting was held with all crewmembers within 30 minutes to discuss what had happened and the 
proper  procedures  to  be  followed.    Proper  procedures  should  always  be  followed  for  any  process  taking 
place.    In  this  incident  the  breakdown  likely  started  by  not  properly  flushing  the  caustic  tank  with  plenty  of 
water after each use.  The design of the tank was questioned and a review of possible change is underway 
including a bottom that might slant toward the drain.  A properly completed JSA might also have recognized 
the  not  so  common  hazard  of  caustic  vapors  from  the  cutting  process  and  included  recommendations  to 
eliminate  or  reduce  this  potential  hazard.    Chemicals  should  be  considered  an  energy  source  when 
completing  a  JSA  and  any  hazards  associated  with  them  must  be  reviewed  and  recognized.    Further 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
training/awareness of Hazard Identification and eliminating the hazard prior to continuing with a task should 
be completed by all rig personnel.  The Mud Engineers on locations should be consulted about the effects of 
chemicals on site and response procedures reviewed so there is no delay in the treatment process.   

 
Personnel  should  also  know  and  follow  the  correct  work  and  emergency  procedures  to  minimize  injury  to 
themselves and others.  All emergencies on site must go through the proper on-site chain of command and 
all this information should be covered during the initial Rig Site Orientation. 

IADC Note:  Refer to the IADC HSE Reference Guide Section 2.8 Hazard Communication and MSDSs.   

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2007 

