Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 12 
 

EMPLOYEE STANDING IN LINE OF TRAVEL RESULTS IN INJURY 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
In  order  to  replace  the  back  pin  on  an  iron  roughneck,  the  rig  crew  was  in  the  process  of  pulling  the  jaws 
loose from the body.  To pull the jaw loose, the crew had connected the boom pole hoist line to the jaw in an 
attempt to pull it from the iron roughneck.  Due to the angle of the hoist line, the load was in a bind and was 
pulling on the jaw in a way that did not allow the jaw to free itself.  The crew continued working with the jaw 
and the hoist line trying to  free the jaw.  Suddenly, the jaw came free and shot across the drill floor, which 
resulted in it striking an employees’ lower leg which then struck the boom pole hoist. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The injured employee was standing in the line of travel of the jaw. 
•  The boom pole hoist line required the line to be in such an angle that put too much tension on the line.  

When the jaw did come loose it traveled in the direction of the angle. 

•  The  driller  was  pre-occupied  with  other  requirements  inside  the  driller’s  cabin  and  was  not  able  to 

properly supervise the job. 

•  The tool pusher was not on the rig floor during this procedure. 
•  Neither the crew nor the equipment mechanic recognized the hazard and did not account for the angle 

and tension that the hoist line was under. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All  rigs  were  instructed  to  create  a  JSA  for  this  task,  which  identifies  the  hazards  associated  with  this 

task; they should also discuss the appropriate steps that are required to prevent these hazards. 

•  The crew members were reminded to recognize the hazard of standing in front of a load especially when 
that load is being pulled against or is under tension.  The injured employee should have been positioned 
to operate the hoist from the other side and out of the line of travel.   

•  For this particular task and the manner in which the task is to be completed, the idea of utilizing a pulley 
system for the hoist line would better keep the line free from any bad angles or tension.  A pulley system 
is to be installed directly above the equipment, which would allow the jaw to be pulled in a direction that 
should not put the lines at a bad angle, which would cause the load to be tensioned. 
•  The equipment Mechanic was reminded that he is responsible to supervise this task. 
•  Anytime direct supervision is needed, regardless of the current activity of the well or any other job that 
may be going  on, the driller and tool pusher must make every  effort to complete their responsibility  as 
supervisors.  No job is so important that we cannot take the time to perform the job safely. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2013 

