 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 15 

FAILURE TO RECOGNIZE HAZARDS RESULTS IN TWO DOWNED POWERLINES IN 

THE SAME DAY 

 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
1st Incident: During rig down operations, a forklift operator told a swamper to move a pole truck across the location and 
out of the way.  The swamper decided to move the truck off of location, but failed to check the height of the poles on the 
truck.    After  crossing  the  cattle  guard,  the  extended  pole  on  the  truck  made  contact  with  an  overhead  ground  wire 
causing it to break and fall to the ground. 
2nd Incident: After a lengthy safety stand down, a loaded truck was leaving the location and was rounding a right hand 
curve on the lease road.  The truck driver pulled over on the right hand shoulder to avoid a truck parked on the left side.  
At that time the load leaned to the right on the steep shoulder and made contact with a different power pole.  This caused 
the  power  pole  to  break  and  fall  across  the  lease  road.    This  incident  occurred  75  yards  past  the  first  incident  and 
approximately 2.5 hours later. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
1st Incident:  
•  Not following company policies when asking a swamper to move a truck rather than calling a designated truck driver. 
•  Not doing a walk around inspection of the pole truck and checking the pole height before moving it. 
•  Not focusing on potential hazards. 
2nd Incident: 
•  Not stopping and having the parked truck move out of the way before proceeding. 
•  Not using a spotter while working in a congested area. 

 

 

 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
The company instructed all employees to: 

•  Discuss  and  identify  any  power  lines  that  might  pose  a  hazard  in  the  truck  routes  during  pre-job  safety 

meetings. 

Follow proper JSA procedures. 

•  Utilize spotters when in congested areas and under power lines with marginal clearance. 
• 
•  Never allow a worker to perform a task he/she is not designated or trained to do. 
•  Always identify the Short Service Employee(s) (SSE) on a job site. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2014 

