Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 15 
 

UNEXPECTED MOVEMENT OF CARGO BASKET RESULTS IN FIRST AID CASE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  Deck  Crew  was  preparing  a  basket  for  backload  and  was  loading  it  with  guideposts.    The  guideposts 
were lowered in to the basket, but they were not sitting correctly.  A crewmember, injured person (IP), asked 
the Crane Operator to lift the load so as to allow for adjustment of the guideposts in the basket.  As the load 
was lifted, it swung  and knocked against the  basket thereby dislodging  it from the timber on the pipe deck 
beam.  The basket came down to rest on the crewmember’s foot. Instructions were then given to the Crane 
Operator to pick up the load and the crewmember was able to remove his foot from his boot.  The IP was 
Medevac’d from the rig on the day of the incident and x-rays confirmed that there were no broken bones. 
 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Initial placement of the basket allowed it to be dislodged 

• 
•  No 360 degree check was carried out when basket was landed or when the cargo was to be loaded 
• 
•  Design of the basket, which had footers, in combination with the deck beams allowed the basket to drop 
•  A Task Risk Assessment (TRA) in use at time of incident was generic for general deck lifts and did not 

IP did not recognize the hazard of placing his foot under the basket 

cover the specifics of loading and unloading baskets/containers 

•  TRA did not address the landing of “footed” type baskets 
•  Currently  there  is  no  drilling  contractor  control  over  the  type  of  cargo  basket  sent  offshore  by  client 

and/or service providers 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  The company has communicated with the client that flat bottomed cargo baskets are the preferred 

method of shipment. 

•  Where this is not possible, the company informed its employees that a specific TRA must be utilized for 

loading and unloading baskets/containers when offshore. 

•  The above was formally placed in a procedure by the company. 
•  The drilling contractor has ensured that TRAs and written work instructions have been created to capture 

the handling and loading/unloading of cargo baskets and containers on deck (fleet wide). 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2013 

