Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 04  
 

RISER OPERATIONS RESULT IN A FALL 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew had just finished picking up all riser from the outboard riser bay.  The gantry crane proceeded to 
transit  from  the  outboard  bay  to  the  inboard  bay.    In  preparation  to  pick  up  the  first  joint  of  riser  from  the 
inboard bay a Roustabout was working from a scissor lift located on the aft end of the inboard riser bay.  The 
scissor  lift  toppled  over  when  struck  by  the  gantry  crane  and  the  employee  rode  the  basket  down 
(approximately  17 feet) to the deck.  Employee(cid:146)s medical condition  was stabilized and he  was evacuated by 
medical helicopter.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Weather and rig movement is known not to be factor.  Employee is an experienced Roustabout with 3+ years 
aboard the rig, and he is a certified scissor lift operator with significant experience performing this operation.  
He had just returned to the rig from days off and had been on the rig approximately hours prior to this incident.  
Employee  was  wearing  a  full  body  harness  and  shock-absorbing  lanyard  that  was  connected  to  the  lift 
workbasket.    Use  of  the  scissor  lift  during  riser  running  operations  had  been  implemented  3  years  prior  to 
enhance safety for the crewmen during attachment of the riser crane to the riser joints.  It was determined that 
procedures  were  found  to  be  available  regarding  this  operation.    It  appears  the  written  procedures  were  not 
followed.    Job  Safety  Analyses  (JSA)  were  in  use  for  the  overall  riser  running  operations  and  specifically  as 
related to the scissor lift. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company:   
 
•  Temporarily suspended rig operations and held stand down with crews upon commencement of 

preliminary investigation. 
Instructed employees to review the procedures for operating a scissor lift.   
Instructed employees to review the JSA for this task.   

• 
• 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  For more information on JSAs refer to IADC Accident Prevention Reference Guide Section 1.9. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright ' 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2003 

