Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 30 
 

MODIFIED TONG ATTACHMENT RESULTS IN MTO 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crewmembers were working on the rig floor preparing to torque up the bit.  A shackle was needed to attach 
the make-up chain to a line-pull sensor.  Instead of getting a shackle from storage, the shackle was taken from the 
snub line on the breakout tong.  The crewmembers did not replace the shackle following the bit being made up to 
the bit sub.   
 
The crew also needed to test the down-hole motor so a stand of collars was run in the hole and the top drive was 
rotated into the stabilizer on top of the stand.  The breakout tongs were placed on the stump for back up purposes.  
When the top drive spin-up was complete, the breakout line spooled off and broke loose from the cathead.  The tong 
spun  around  rapidly  causing  the  loose  end  of  the  snub  line  to  strike  the  driller  on  his  hardhat.    The  driller  was 
knocked  down  and  was  later  taken  to  the  hospital for  evaluation.    The  driller  was checked  out  at  the  hospital  and 
released to return to work.  One stitch was required to close a head wound. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
One issue was that the crewmember perceived a shortage of shackles so he borrowed a shackle from the breakout 
tong’s snub line when one was needed to attach the load cell to the jerk chain.  At that point, no one recognized the 
hazard created by modifying the equipment and they failed to reinstall the shackle.  Other shackles were available, 
which leads to the next safety issue. 
 
The second issue was that those supervising did not pay full attention to what the rig floor crewmembers were doing 
to prepare for the task of torquing the bit.  The issue then is of supervising the operation and not getting so busy with 
other  activities  that  attention  isn't  paid  to  the  rig  floor  crewmember's  behavior.    Other  shackles  were  available  but 
supervisors failed to recognize a need to oversee rig floor crewmembers in their effort to attach the load cell.  
 
A third remedial action identified from this incident is the need for a better, engineered driller's protection cage.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Crews  discussed  the  need  for  better  communications.    They  also  installed  a  plastic  tie  in  the  shackle  pin  to 
make the removal of the shackle more difficult and less likely to happen.  All shackles/clevises must have the 
pin wire tied in place at all times.  A good practice would be to leave a shackle attached to the load cell so it’s 
available when needed. 

•  Equipment modifications that are not documented and communicated to all personnel can lead to very serious 
incidents.    Anytime  equipment  is  modified,  it  must  be  returned  to  its  normal  state  as  soon  as  possible.  
Obviously there must be a method used to alert all personnel to the fact that a change was made.   

•  The driller’s cage height has been raised and the cage was extended to more completely protect the driller.  
•  All  crews  were  reminded  to  an  “equipment  modification”  process,  which  includes  a  document  that  must  be 
signed by the appropriate supervisor in charge and passed on to other crews should a crew change take place.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2003 

