Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 34  
 

PREVENTING CROWN COLLISIONS 

The crown saver device toggle was contacted and engaged 
however due to speed, the blocks hit the crown.  Sheared 
bolts and other hardware fell from crown bumper.  The 
crown was undamaged but dropped objects posed a hazard 
to derrickman and crew. 
Note damage to the crown beam. 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
First  Incident:    The  rig  was  doing  a  wiper  trip.    While 
working  through  a  tight  spot,  the  Driller  lost  count  of  the 
singles.    The  top  layer  of  drilling  line  on  the  drum  passed 
through  under  the  crown  saver  device  toggle.    The  blocks 
collided  with  the  crown  bumper  block  shaking  the  derrick 
upon  impact.   Crown  saver device had  not  been tested  on 
this shift. 
Second  Incident:    During  a  trip  out  to  change  the  bit, 
someone was trying to talk with the driller causing him to be 
distracted and the blocks hit the crown.  The tool joints had 
been miscounted and even though the crown saver device 
activated,  it  did  not  stop  the  blocks  in  time  to  prevent 
collision.  It was determined the crown saver device was set 
too high and trip speed was excessive.  It had been tested 
but not with the drilling line.   
Third  Incident:    While  pulling  out  of  the  hole,  the  driller 
miscounted the tool joints.   
 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Common threads to all the above accidents:  Due to distraction and/or loss of focus and concentration, the 
driller lost count of tool joints.  Losing count resulted in the driller’s failure to reduce traveling block speed in time.  
Additionally, the improperly set and/or untested crown saver device.  In most of the above cases, damage was mitigated by 
a crown saver bumper block system.  It is a common practice to envelop wooden blocks in wire mesh to prevent fragments 
from falling upon collision. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company took the following corrective actions 
to prevent recurrence: 
 
1.  The  driller  should  stop  and  secure  the  blocks  if  someone  needs  to  speak  with  him  either  by  phone  or  in  person.  

 

Distraction is the primary factor that causes crown collisions. 

2.  Operate blocks at a controllable speed.  Avoid rushing.   
3.  As a backup to the driller’s attention, everyone on the floor should count the tool joints coming through the rotary.   
4.  Test the crown saver device by slowly pulling into the crown saver device toggle with the top layer of line on the drum 
and  do  not  use  a  “broom  handle”  to  activate  it.    Ensure  the  derrickman  is  monitoring  distance  between  blocks  and 
crown and can signal the driller when the crown saver device is being tested or set. 

5.  The crown saver device should be checked with the drilling line as soon as practicable by each driller coming on tour, 
before each trip, and after each slip and cut.  This check should be noted on the daily drilling report.  (IADC APRG 
3.17.N, API RP54 9.4.8) 

6.  For “double masts,” remember a kelly length plus a single will be longer than a double.  Extra care should be taken. 
7.  The crown saver device must also be reset and checked after moving it for longer stands during trips. 
8.  Ensure safety of the person adjusting the crown saver device by immobilizing drawworks, “chaining” brake, and taking 
necessary measures to prevent anyone from operating the drawworks while the crown saver device is being adjusted. 

9.  Be sure that the carriage mechanism that carries the crown saver device is secured against drift from vibration. 
Note see IADC Safety Alerts 99-03, 00-21, and 02-22 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2003 

