Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

MISMATCHED HAMMER UNION RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
ALERT 06 – 01 
 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
A worker while operating a sand filter valve in a 
temporary  well  test  setup,  sustained  severe 
multiple  injuries  caused  by  the  impact  from  a 
female  hammer  union,  inadvertently  dislodged 
from  a  side  outlet,  as  well  testing  was  in 
progress.    He  was  thrown  19  ft  from  the  sand 
filter  equipment.    He  was  evacuated  to  a 
regional clinic where he underwent emergency 
surgery.  He later died in the clinic.  

He  had  obtained  signed  PTW,  held  toolbox  talk  and  held 
safety  meeting  with  Rig  Team  and  Gas  plant  Operations 
team  leader.    He  then  went  to  open  up  well  to  well  test 
surface  facilities.    In  order  to  obtain  a  sand  sample  while 
producing  the  well  and  while,  testing  in  progress,  the  IP 
climbed  the  sand  filter  equipment,  stood  on  the  wheel  of 
the  discharged  valve  to  operate  the  middle  valves.    His 
lower abdomen faced the side outlet (see the photo).  The 
female  hammer  union  dislodged  from  the  side  outlet  and 
hit him in the lower abdomen. 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Connection was a mismatch between the male and female hammer Union (602 female to 1502 male). See  
Photo:                                              Failed union end 

 

 

 
FIG 602 

 

Note:  FIG 1502 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 
1.  Configuration of equipment at well was not according to manufacturer’s design layout.  However, Well 

Test contractor stated that the configuration at the two previous tests were the same as this well. 

2.  Manufacturer’s configuration included a permanent access ladder and a working platform for operating 

the middle valves and different orientation of the valves.   

3.  The configuration and operating manual were not available to Well Test contractor at the time they took 

over the equipment. 

4.  Original design had a flanged outlet and not a hammer union. 
5.  There was a change of valve orientation.  Valve orientation may have been changed for convenience of 

access to the valves during servicing the equipment in the yard. 

6.  HAZOP did not identify the hazard with valve orientation and configuration.   
7. 

IP stood on discharge valve wheel, about 3ft above the ground to operate the middle valve (8.6 ft high) 
isolating the lower chamber.  He did not use the temporary access (ladder) provided and in any case it 
was not fit for operating the valve. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Initial Main recommendations, are awaiting final conclusions and reports. 
 
1.  The operator and contractor companies to stop work.   
2.  Check all temporary piping and remove non standard subs from site. 
3.  Visit ongoing well test sites and audit the set-up and piping. 
4.  Remove and replace sand filter. 
5.  Send out industry alert on dangers of hammer lug unions. 
6.  Operator/Contractors jointly develop a seminar on safety of pressure vessels. 
7.  Extend same to other well intervention facilities and rig up. 
8.  When handing over equipment to other parties, ensure the history, certification and operating sequence 

9.  Print a laminated alert, hang on connections and rigged-up facilities and issue to all personnel to 

10.  HAZOP reporting format should clearly state hazard and recommendation to enable linking of close-out 

are included. 

increase awareness 

action. 

11.  Develop an “Operations Guide for the use of Temporary Pipe work Systems”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to IADC Safety Alerts 98-01, 99-33, 00-15, 03-16 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2006 

