Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
ALERT 04 – 42 
 

CASING RUNNING INCIDENT RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While running 13 3/8” casing, the company man requested the fill line length to be extended.  The casing 
company did not have the proper joints available, so it was decided to add a Kelly valve to the Kelly.  The top 
drive was put in the extended position to clear the well hole, which contained the casing.  Spider elevator 
was placed beside the well hole.  The extension was placed on the rig floor and not in the mouse hole due to 
it being covered and not available.  The crew was attempting to hold onto the fill line arrangement with the air 
hoist line and chain sling on one side and supported on the other side by the left side (back up tong)rig tong.  
The IP was placed in between the left rig tong and the spider elevator to support the tong while make up 
torque was applied.  Due to make up torque from the top drive, the fill line arrangement and the left rig tong 
moved toward IP who was trapped by the spider elevator and struck him in his right arm causing a fracture. 

Black circle is point to spider elevator place beside well hole 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Placing the extension on the rig floor and not in the mouse hole did not provide good stability for final make 
up torque.  The placement of the spider elevator on the rig floor made a tight work place and the IP worked 
between fill line arrangement and spider elevator.  Since they could not rotate the rotary table, the top drive 
in  the  extended  position  was  used  to  torque  the  extension.    By  not  having  the  proper  extension  was  not 
available,  third  Party  Company  failed  to  comply  with  equipment  requirement.    Company  safety  procedures 
not  followed,  supervisors  conducting  this  operation  on  rig  floor  directly  instead  of  the  mouse  hole.  
Inadequate  task  preparation,  Supervisors  didn’t  conduct  this  operation  in  the  mouse  hole  and  left  spider 
elevator beside the well hole waiting for next job.  Lack of safety awareness, Supervisors supporting fill line 
arrangement by air hoist wires with break failure and tight it with chain sling.  Poor supervision, Supervisors 
didn’t maintain a good practice / good supervision because they start making torque while IP still in trapped 
position between left rig tong and spider elevator.  Job risk assessment was not adequate for the task.  IP 
didn’t recognize the hazards of the task or his position. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2004 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following to rig 
personnel: 
 
•  Prior to beginning operations, third party equipment is to be checked to ensure proper equipment is on 

hand. 

•  A JSA including a risk assessment is to be conducted prior to changes in procedures. 
•  Supervisors are to follow company policy requiring the mouse hole to be used to steady connections. 
•  Personnel are to be instructed to stay out of possible trap areas.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2004 

