Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 40 
 

NYLON SLING FAILED WHILE POSITIONING BOP CONTROL POD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A crew was moving the BOP control POD from the bow to the aft of the moon pool in order to place it on the 
POD  stand.  The  POD  was  lifted  with  one  winch  line  with  a  sheave  anchored  directly  above  the  POD.  The 
weight was then transferred from that winch line to another winch line.  The second winch line was lowered 
through the rig floor.  During this procedure the utility winch in the moon pool was being utilized with a nylon 
strap choked to the POD arm so the POD could be pulled into position and lowered onto the POD stand.  The 
nylon strap broke which allowed the POD to rotate and strike an employee. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The employee positioned himself in a hazardous  area between the POD and the handrail protecting the 

2.  The 3’ x 1” nylon strap came into contact with the sharp beveled edge on the guide funnel of the POD arm, 

moon pool. 

which cut the nylon strap. 

3.  The 3’ x 1” nylon strap was in a choker configuration and rated for 2,500 lbs.  This strap was used to pull 
the POD approximately 8’ from center, which could have exceeded the Safe Working Load (SWL) of the 
strap. 

4.  JSA  for  this  task  was  reviewed,  however  no  mention  was  made  of  body  placement,  or  utilizing  a  nylon 

strap. 

 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directive to rig 
personnel: 
 
•  Proper body and hand placement cannot be stressed enough, and the JSA must be clear on hazardous 
areas and safe zones. Ensure that all JSAs identify these areas, and that these areas are discussed and 
clearly understood prior to the start of any task. 

•  Ensure  the  JSA  matches  the  task.  Each  step  and  all  equipment  used  must  be  analyzed  to  ensure  the 

hazards are identified and safety measures are in place to eliminate those hazards. 

•  When using a nylon strap, ensure the strap cannot come into contact with a sharp object. 
•  When applying horizontal or diagonal pulls, wire rope shall be used, and the SWL of the wire rope must 

exceed the rating of the winch. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2003 

