Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

IMPROPER GUARDING RESULTS IN MTO 

 
ALERT 10 – 03 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
 

 

 

 

 

While checking the radiator of a standby 
generator for overheating, the injured employee 
placed his hand on the top, the middle, and then 
the bottom of the radiator.  When he placed his 
hand on the bottom of the radiator his thumb was 
stuck by the unguarded fan.  The injury resulted 
in the thumb requiring stitches.   

Missing Guard

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The water pump was not working properly and the temperature gauge was not of adequate range.  
  The injured decided to check the engine temperature by feeling if the radiator was hot in different areas 

without considering hazards of the missing guard.   

  This generator had been set in the generator room 6 months previously and although started weekly, no 
one noticed the missing lower section of fan guard during any weekly inspections or on the last pictorial 
survey.   

  Although  the  injured  had  been  trained  in  STOP  he  failed  to  use  the  ABBI  technique  (Above,  Below, 

  This type of hazard was previously noted and company safety bulletins distributed yet we failed to detect 

Behind, and Inside). 

the hazard.  

  While incidents can occur for a number of reasons ALL incidents are preventable.   
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

 
  The supervisors suggested adding a section to the weekly surveys to include stand by equipment, since 

the focus is usually on equipment in daily use.   

  Guarding was placed around the bottom of the radiator fan.   
  Rig  personnel  were  instructed  to  review  previously  issued  Safety  Bulletins  regarding  equipment 

guarding. 

  Equipment can be properly maintained, inspected, and repaired and personnel can be properly trained to 

avoid using improper procedures.   

  This is the 3rd injury of this type in the last 18 months.  Don’t be number 4. Look Above, Below, Behind, 

and Inside before proceeding with your work.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2010 

