 
ALERT 06 – 26 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

CLEANING MUD FROM DRILL COLLARS RESULTS IN FINGER 

AMPUTATION 

A Floorman suffered an amputated finger by using a rig light safety cable to strip compacted “gumbo” mud 
off  of  a  drill  collar  while  the  drill  collar was  being rotated  into  the  hole.    By  the  time  the  driller  noticed  and 
stopped the pipe from rotating, the eye of the lanyard had completely removed the flesh from the first joint of 
the middle finger of his left hand.  The doctor later decided the skin could not be reattached and surgically 
removed the remaining bone. 

The driller was experiencing down-hole well problems and was focused on his console instruments.  He did 
not notice that the Floorman made a short search and returned with a 24” long lanyard and was attempting to 
use it to remove the “gumbo” from the pipe.  

The employee slipped a finger of each hand into the lanyard eyes at each end and over the pipe attempting 
to “cut” the mud off the pipe as it went down into the hole.  When another Floorman attempted to assist with 
the stripping, one end of the safety cable lanyard was dropped causing the lanyard to wrap around the pipe 
catching the employee’s finger.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the following: 
 
•  First thing - Never put anything on rotating pipe! 
•  Secondly,  the  supervisor  on  the  floor  (driller)  was  focused  on  one  specific  aspect  of  his  job.    The 
Floorman performing another operation at the same time is called “simultaneous operations” and special 
action  must  be  taken  when  working  in  this  situation.    Additional  supervisors  might  be  necessary  when 
performing “simultaneous operations”. 

•  Thirdly, as for the activity being done at the time of the injury, there was no real need to try and remove 
the mud while running the drill string into the hole.  The reason for removing mud from the drill string is to 
prevent it from falling to the floor while the pipe is standing in the derrick.   This activity should be done 
coming out of the hole -- if the pipe is not rotating. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2006 

