Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 01 
 

NITROGEN BOTTLES IMPROPERLY FILLED 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently a Toolpusher performed a gas test on the Nitrogen(N2) bottles on location.  One nitrogen bottle was 
found to contain Oxygen (O2).  The bottle had the proper fittings and was marked Nitrogen.  In several other 
international areas  where the Oxygen (O2) and  Nitrogen (N2) bottles are  identical Oxygen  was  also found in 
bottles  marked  “Nitrogen”.    If  a  N2  bottle  containing  O2  is  used  to  charge  equipment  such  as  a  mud  pump 
pulsation dampener it could lead to potential loss of life and/or equipment damage.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this issue, the company instructed all operations personnel:   
 
•  Remember, a mixture of Oxygen and Nitrogen gases will act as an explosive agent.  
•  Contact suppliers and have them document the procedures they use when filling bottles.   
•  Ensure each bottle is properly marked/labeled for material being used. 
• 

Implemented  a  policy  to  test  all  N2  bottles  on  all  locations  to  determine  the  quality  of  N2  received  from 
suppliers.   

 
THE COMPANY ISSUED THE FOLLOWING DETECTION METHODS:  
 
•  Where possible this verification test should take place in the area yard prior to the bottles being shipped to 

the field.  The bottles should then be marked that they have been checked. 

•  Testing options are:   

o  Each location (Rig) should have a hand held pump for gas detection.  Insert an Oxygen test tube and 
slightly open N2 bottle.  Pump handle twice.  If material inside tube turns black it is a positive test for 
Oxygen.  Mark bottle not usable and return to vender. 

o  With a hand held Multi Gas Detector, hold detector in front of N2 bottle.  Open bottle slightly.  Normal  
Oxygen reading is approx. 20%.  If alarm sounds and O2 level goes to 0% then this indicates the bottle 
does  not  contain  O2.    If  reading  remains  at  20%  O2  or  rises  it  indicates  a  positive  test  for  O2.    On 
certain  units,  the  alarm  also  sounds  for  high  levels  (above  23.5%)  of  O2  so  check  the  readout  for 
correct percentages of O2.  For bottles testing positive for O2, mark not usable and return to vender. 

 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to Alert 02 – 06 or Section 6 of the IADC APRG for additional information.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2003 

