 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 28  

 

SUDDEN ICE PLUG RELEASE RESULTS IN STRUCK-BY INJURY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
While converting from air to mud, the employee was attempting to reinstall the pressure gauge on the standpipe manifold.  When he 
removed the bull plug from the manifold, he noticed ice had accumulated inside the two-inch (5cm) line.  He notified the Driller and then 
attempted  to  remove  the  ice  using  a  hand  tool.    Trapped  pressure  existed  inside  the  lower  section  of  the  standpipe.    As  the  ice 
dislodged from the line, it struck the employee in the ribs on the right side, causing internal injuries.  He sustained further injuries when 
he fell back into the handrail striking his shoulder. 
 
 

Air Line (disconnected) 

Five-inch (12cm)  
Gate Valve 

Air Manifold 

 

Frozen 2” (5cm) 
Connection 

 

Standpipe 

Five-inch (12cm)  
Gate Valve 

Standpipe 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 

• 

• 

Trapped  pressure  contained  in  the  section  of  the  standpipe  below  the  five-inch  (12cm)  gate  valve  was  not  recognized  and 
released prior to removing the two-inch (5cm) bull plug from the lower section of the standpipe. 
The crew assumed that the standpipe below the five-inch (12cm) gate valve did not have pressure since they were drilling with 
air, which was supplied and tied in above the five-inch (12cm) gate valve. 

•  Air  pressure  was  contained  in  the  standpipe  below  the  five-inch  (12cm)  valve  either  from  a  leaking  valve  or  from  releasing 

pressure into the standpipe through the valve to make a connection while air drilling.  

•  Pressure reading devices (gauge or transducer) had been removed from the lower section of the standpipe for the air drilling.  
• 
The crew did not understand the manifold configuration and did not realize that up-line approval was required for in order for 
changes to be made to the manifold. 
The crew did not expect icing on the inside of the standpipe. 

• 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

 

•  Crewmembers were reminded to discuss the potential for “trapped pressure” and the importance of NEVER ASSUMING that 

•  Employees were reminded to be aware of and to stay out of the potential “line of fire”. 
•  All crew members were made aware that extra effort must be taken to prevent pressurizing the lower section of the standpipe 

pressure does not exist in a line.  

during air drilling operations. 

•  Crews were instructed that pressure reading devices are not to be removed from any isolated line unless other measures are 

•  Effort shall be made to assist crews, new to a rig/rig type, in order to develop a rig specific JSA (with appropriate detail) to 

taken to verify the presence of trapped pressure. 

familiarize them with any new aspects of a rig or rig type. 

Crewmembers must be reminded of the potential for icing inside of any line and are to discuss (during JSA and periodically during cold 
weather operations) the hazards and steps to prevent an incident from occurring during any operation requiring 
separation/disconnection of lines/connections. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2013 

