Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 06 
 

SINGLE JOINT ELEVATOR / NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A high potential near miss incident occurred recently while conducting a routine operation.  The operation at 
the time was laying down 4-1/2 inch tubing and involved placing a single joint into the mouse hole.  The joint 
was latched using a set of single joint elevators in order to pick it up and lay it down on the catwalk.  An air 
tugger  was  used  to  hoist  the  joint  of  tubing  and  while  lowering  it  down  the  V-door  the  elevators  opened, 
releasing the joint and resulting in the joint falling down the V-door onto the catwalk.  Fortunately there were 
no personnel in the immediate vicinity.  One important fact to consider is that when this event occurred, the 
crew had just changed out for a coffee break and the man coming back on the job did not check the latching 
of the elevator nor did he check the integrity of the safety pin.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  Procedures  were  in  place  along  with  a  Job  Risk  Assessment  (JRA)  however  these  were  not 

completely followed. 

•  Double checking of the safety pin was not listed on the Job Risk Assessment. 
•  Safety pin installed was the split pin type and not the single pin type as recommended.  
•  Failure to identify and implement an effective Management of Change (MOC). 
•  Lack of proper supervision. 
•  Lack of awareness / Complacency with regard to conducting an apparent routine task. 
•  Failure to prepare an adequate Job Risk Assessment. 
•  Failure  to  comply  with  the  Job  Risk  Assessment  i.e.  double  check  the  secure  latching  of  the 

elevators. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
To address this incident, this company issued the following to rig personnel: 
 
Our  ability  to  identify  change  and  the  actions  we  take  to  manage  that  change  will  continue  to 
determine  our  level  of  Safety  Success.    Please  refer  to  our  Management  of  Change  (MOC)  Policy.  
This near miss like most incidents was completely preventable if we had merely managed the change and 
effectively  used  the  safety  tools  that  were  available.    When  conducting  risk  assessment  we  must  always 
consider all known and potential hazards and then apply effective risk reduction measures.  Quite simply it 
is a matter of actually doing what we say we are going to do. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2006 

