Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 14  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

MIS-HANDLED SUB RESULTS IN FIRST AID 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the crews were picking up the bottom hole assembly, two employees were trying to put a lifting strap 
on a handling sub to place it back in its storage area.  While in an upright position, and not supported, the 
sub fell over striking one of the employees on the foot.  The injured employee was treated with first aid and 
returned to work. 
 

•  The handling sub could not be properly balanced nor stand on its own without being supported. 
•  One of the employees released his grip from the handling sub which allowed the sub to fall over. 
•  The employees did not recognize the hazard of not supporting the sub and the placement of their feet. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  company  created  a  JSA  for  this  task  that  should  be  reviewed  and/or  updated  as  the  job  task 
changes.  The JSA would point out the hazards and instruct the employees how to eliminate and prevent 
these types of hazards from occurring.  

•  The  employees  were  reminded  that  the  handling  sub  should  be  laid  down  prior  to  attaching  the  lifting 

•  Employees  were  instructed  to  handle  subs  in  a  manner  that  would  eliminate  the  possibility  of  it  falling 

over, i.e. held by another crew member while putting the lifting strap on.   

•  The company reminded the employees participating with such a task that they should make every effort 
to  recognize  and  eliminate  the  hazards  associated  with  the  handling  of  drill  pipe  and  bottom  hole 
assembly equipment. 

strap. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2013 

