Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 25 
 

DROPPED ACCUMULATOR BOTTLE RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  Rig  Manager  was  fatally  injured  after  an  accumulator  bottle  exploded.    The  Rig  Manager  was  in  the 
process of picking up freight from a third party distributor.  The freight consisted of two nitrogen bottles and 
two 10 gallon accumulator bottles.  The bottles were stored in a trailer which required forklift assistance.  It is 
believed that one of the accumulator bottles came off the pallet as the forklift driver backed away from the 
trailer.    The  Rig  Manager  was  positioned  at  the  driver’s  side  of  the  crew  cab  approximately  25  feet  (7.5 
meters) from the trailer.  The bottle struck the edge of the concrete pad and exploded, fatally injuring the Rig 
Manager.  
 
The company is currently waiting on third party engineering information pertaining to the explosion which will 
come  through  the  governmental,  Workplace  Health  and  Safety  agency.    In  the  interim,  the  following 
measures have been implemented until the cause can be determined. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All accumulator bottles will be shipped with a maximum of 5 PSI. The balance of the pre-charge will be 

completed at the rig.  

•  The company has reinforced all handling procedures pertaining to pressurized containers.   
•  Employees are NOT to accept under any circumstances, pressurized vessels, if they are not adequately 
secured.    This  would  include  SCBA  bottles,  pulsation  dampeners,  nitrogen  bottles,  propane  and 
accumulator bottles.  

•  The company is currently reviewing standards associated to maintenance of all pressurized cylinders.  
•  A follow-up Safety Alert will be issued once the cause has been determined.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2005 

