Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 50 
 

IMPROPER INSTALLATION, COMMISSIONING & TESTING OF CROWN 

SAVER DEVICE 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The traveling block made contact with the crown bumpers after tripping the setting of the crown saver device 
and not coming to a full stop.  The crown saver device was not properly installed during the rig upgrade.  Post 
upgrade commissioning and numerous required daily and monthly tests failed to identify the problem and as a 
result, the crown saver device was not capable of fully arresting the travel of the block.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  crown  saver  device  was  not  properly  connected.    The  commissioning  and  subsequent  testing  failed  to 
discover that all the air to the drawworks drum clutch was not being released.  This allowed the drawworks to 
crawl after the brake had set.  Also, because of problems with the plastic coated drill line not properly spooling 
on the drawworks drum, the foot throttle had been adjusted to limit the speed of the drawworks.  It appears 
that  to  speed  up  the  drawworks  that  the  hand  throttle  was  being  used,  instead  of  the  foot  throttle,  and  this 
contributed to the incident.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Issued the following action items to rig supervisors: 
 

1.  All crown saver devices are to be inspected for the correct installation and condition of control valves, 

piping and air cylinders  

2.  After  inspection,  the  crown  saver  device  is  to  be  function-tested  to  ensure  that  the  air  to  the  clutch 
control valves is shut off disengaging the clutch and rendering it inoperable upon the actuation of the 
crown saver device. 

3.  Ensure the drawworks brakes are fully set after actuation of the crown saver device. 
4.  Discuss  with  all  Drillers  that  the  hand  throttle  is  not to  be  used  as  the  normal  method  to  control  trip 
speed,  as  this  necessitates  taking  one  hand  off  the  clutch  or  brake  and  significantly  hampers  quick 
response to stop the drawworks.  

5.  Refer to the manufacturer’s instructions for complete guidance on the setting and testing procedures 

for the crown saver device. 

 
 
 
Refer to IADC Safety Alerts:  99-03, 00-21, 02-02, 03-34 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued December 2003 

