Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 08  
 

DROPPED DRILL PIPE STAND RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While tripping 5-1/2” drill pipe into the hole, a roughneck was working the monkey board and lost control of a 
stand.  The stand struck the Top Drive System (TDS), glanced off and came to rest against the derrick.  The 
impact of the stand against the Top Drive System sheared off a “Stand Off” roller, which fell approximately 
75’ to the rig floor and landed 3’ from the “Dog House”.  The roller that fell to the deck weighs 25 lbs, is 3 ½” 
in diameter in the center, and has 5” diameter ends. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The  roller  is  not  original  manufacturer’s  equipment  (OME);  it  was  added  to  keep  air  hoist  wires  in  the 

derrick from potential obstruction points on the Top Drive System.   

•  The investigation found that the pin through the roller was seen to be in a worn state.   
•  Four  stands  in  the  same  row  were  not  secured  properly  and  when  the  roughneck  working  the  derrick 
unchained the next stand to be made up the unsecured stands forced the stand that the roughneck was 
handling to get away from him and he lost control of it.   
In  addition  the  stands  had  excess  angle  in  them  because  of  incorrect  placement  on  the  floor  in  the 
setback area.   

• 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed their rig personnel:  
 
• 

Inspect the TDS aboard your rig for add-on rollers and consider replacing those rollers with wear pads 
that have a safety line.   

•  Prior to making modifications, seek guidance from original equipment manufacturer (OEM). 
•  The issues of experience and placement should be communicated to your crews through pre-tour 

meetings and JSAs. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2007 

