Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 02 – 32  
 

PERSONNEL HOISTING INCIDENTS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While a rig crew was nippling down cementing head following a casing job, an employee was suspended from 
a  man-rider  hoist.    When  the  cementing  head  was  loosened,  it  twisted  around  and  the  valve  struck  the 
suspended employee on the knee, causing a contusion.  The employee was examined and returned to work.   
 
A second employee on another project was inspecting the top drive while suspended from the hoist.  He was 
holding himself in a position against the pull of gravity and his foot slipped.  He swung into the brace that was 
supporting his weight and struck his inner thigh, causing a bruise to the ball of his hipbone.  The injury resulted 
in a lost time incident. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Both  incident  investigation  reports  identified  a  PRE-JOB  safety  meeting  and  a  review  of  a  JSA  on  hoisting 
personnel as a preventative measure that should have been taken, but was not.  The personnel involved didn't 
take the time to discuss the steps to the task, the hazards involved and how the hazards would be controlled 
before starting the job.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed rig personnel and supervisors:   
 

•  Pre-job  safety  meetings  don't  take  much  time  and  can  be  done  anywhere.    They  should  include 
everyone involved in the task and must address the hazards and corrective measures to eliminate or 
reduce the hazards.   They can take place near the brake handle, along the catwalk, in the doghouse; 
or any place quiet enough for people to hear and be heard.  

 
•  Review the JSA in the pre-job meeting if one is available for the task or make one if it’s not.  The JSA 
and pre-job meetings are “hazard recognition” tools and they must be used to prevent injuries.  Pre-job 
safety meetings and JSA reviews should be as common as 'turning to the right' in our business.   

 
• 

It cannot be assumed that all personnel know the hazards of various jobs.  To prevent personnel from 
being injured, Supervisors need to ensure that your crews routinely discuss the hazards before they 
start the job.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2002 

