Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 06 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – RIGGING SCREW JAW END 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two  workers  were  assigned  with  the  task  of  fitting  rigging  screws  between  the  top  drive  torque  tube  track 
and the mast on both the driller’s and off-driller’s side.  Prior to climbing, both workers donned their safety 
harnesses and attached a safety lanyard from one end of the rigging screw to the D ring at the front of their 
harness.   This  meant  that,  when climbing,  the rigging  screw  would  have been vertical with  the  tied off  jaw 
end at the top and unsecured-end running down the right hand side of the person’s body, ending around his 
thigh.   When  the second worker climbed  the  derrick  ladder  to a  height  of  approximately 40  feet  above the 
floor the unsecured jaw end at the bottom dislodged and fell to the ground (approx 60 feet).  The jaw alone 
weighed 2.3 kg and landed 9 meters out from well-center on the driller’s side in line with where the V door 
meets the catwalk and only 10 feet away from a tag-line operator assisting a crane lift.  The floor was clear of 
all personnel prior to the job commencing except the Assistant Driller, who was supervising the job. 
 
It is important that the terminology used throughout in relation to 
rigging screws / turnbuckles is understood.  The picture to the right 
shows the two different types.  The construction of the rigging 
screw is such that the thread is enclosed inside a tubular section 
of steel.  The rigging screw is the one at the top and is the type 
which was carried up the derrick.  The turnbuckle pictured at the 
bottom is the recommended type and has replaced the rigging 
screw type.  Note the turnbuckle used on site is a jaw-jaw type 
 
 

 

 

Improper rigging screw 

Dropped Jaw End 

Safety pin fitted to inside thread end 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Both  rigging  screws  and  turnbuckles  are  normally  referred  to  as  “turnbuckles”.    Original  equipment 

manufacturer (OEM) drawings call for turnbuckles to be fitted. 

  The design of the rigging screw is such makes it hard to determine how far the jaw threads are screwed 

 

in. 
Jaw  ends  of  the  rigging  screws  are  not  fitted  with  any  secondary  securing  device  (i.e.  locking  nut)  to 
prevent them from backing out.  Turnbuckles are fitted with locking nuts. 

  Before sending the workers up the derrick the Assistant Driller screwed in both ends of the rigging screw 
a few turns.  Given that one end screws “clockwise” and the other “counter-clockwise” it is possible that 
he may have actually backed one end out some turns instead of in.  This would not be noticeable within 
the tubular section. 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
  Rigging screws were new and easy to screw in and out.  Given the position of the rigging screw during 
climbing it is considered possible that with every ladder rung climbed the person’s right thigh may have 
been knocking the bottom jaw causing it to turn and back out. 

  Even though this was a non-routine job, no Permit-to-Work or Job Safety Analysis was in place for the 

task.   

  The second person to climb said that he had performed this task before and knew they were not using 
the correct turnbuckle type.  He did not stop the job or question his supervisor because quote “he is the 
expert and he must know” unquote. 

  Failure to STOP THE JOB.  The employee, who had done the job before and realized that the incorrect 

turnbuckle was being used, did not intervene.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Onsite Supervisor is to reinforce “Stopping the Job” is a right and an expected practice.   
  Rigging screws have been taken out of service and replaced with OEM recommended turnbuckles. 
  The end of the turnbuckle jaw thread has been drilled to allow a safety pin to be fitted.  This will act as an 

extra safety device in addition to already fitted locking nuts. 

  Permit-to-Work and Job Safety Analysis awareness sessions were held with all onsite crews. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2009 

