Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 08 
 

UNSECURED LOAD RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A supply boat was to off load Oil Base Mud (OBM).  To enable access to the OBM hose take-off point on 
the starboard rail of the vessel several pieces of cargo had to offloaded.  Initially the vessel’s Bosun and 
two vessel Able Seamen (AB) were on the boat deck.  A rack was transferred from the starboard side of 
the metal plated deck area to the rig and the Bosun departed the deck.  Then a framed wire line unit was 
prepared for transfer.  Tag lines were attached to the wire line unit, the lifting gear checked and the two 
AB’s  started  to  walk  away  from  the  load  to  wait  for  the  crane  hook  to  be  lowered.    As  one  of  the  ABs 
turned  his  back  to  the  unit,  a  large  wave  or  swell  impacted  on  the  port  stern  quarter  and  caused  the 
vessel to roll to starboard causing the wire line unit to suddenly move across the deck.  One AB felt the 
unit begin to move and shouted a warning but the other AB was struck on the back and catapulted across 
the metal plated deck where he was pinned.  The vessel then rolled to port and the wire line unit slid back 
across  the  deck.    The  injured  AB  fell  to  the  deck  unconscious  and  the  other  AB  rushed  across  to  the 
injured AB to help but realized he was very badly injured and since he did not have radio communication 
he went for help.  The injured died from his injuries. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The injured was in an unsafe position on the metal plated area of the vessel and the AB’s were not 

visible from the bridge.  

•  An unsecured 8.5 Ton wire line unit was able to slide across the metal plate decking when a wave or 

swell caused the vessel to roll to starboard. 

•  Vessel management allowed the wire line unit and other cargo being placed in non-optimum positions 
on  the  deck  and  the  vessel  routing  were  not  considered  so  the  cargo  offloading  sequence  was  not 
prioritized.   

•  The wire line unit, which was equipped with narrow metal skids, was placed on the metal plated area 
at the stern of the vessel with no friction creating material between the metal surfaces and was not 
secured in position prior to being lifted by the crane.  

•  There was no vessel supervision present at the time of the offloading operation. 
•  There was no evidence of job planning for the offshore operations or risk assessments being carried 

out. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following 
recommendations: 
 
1.  Ensure that there are clear instructions provided to the shore base and vessel Captain for deck cargo 

items or under deck bulk materials that are deemed urgent and are to be offloaded first.  

2.  At an appropriate time prior to the planned departure of the vessel establish a cargo cutoff point.  This 

will enable a proper load-list to be compiled. 

3.  The load-list will be discussed with the vessel’s Master or his delegate and a deck plan will be drawn.  
The  safe  loading  of  the  vessel  and  the  positioning  of  the  lifts  to  provide  the  correct  sequence  for 
offloading offshore is the responsibility of the Master or his delegate. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2004 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 08 Continued 
 
4. 

If cargo has to be placed on the metal plated area on the stern of a vessel then adequate provision 
must  be  made  to  place  a friction creating  material  between  the metal  surfaces  e.g.  wood dunnage, 
rubber matting, cargo netting. 

5.  Prior  to  the  commencement  of  vessel  loading  operations  a  toolbox  talk  will  be  held  –  work  scope 

6. 

detailed, responsibilities assigned, safety requirements, etc. 
If additional cargo is to be added to the vessel, then the plan must be revisited and the effect of the 
changes assessed prior to loading the cargo onto the vessel.  

7.  To eliminate potentially unsafe lifting gear/apparatus, a cargo inspection regime must be established 

prior to loading anything onto the deck of the vessel.   

8.  Vessel management should empower people to enable them to “stop the job” if they feel that they or 
their colleagues are in an unsafe situation or are about to be.  Reassess the risk and do the job in a 
different way to eliminate the hazard. 

9.  Designate  someone  to  be  the  Banksman  (Signalman)  and  identify  this  person  to  the  crane  driver 

(perhaps by using a high-visibility vest). 

10.  Review the use of taglines to ensure they are used safely.  
11.  Instigate on-hire Safety & Operations briefings to all vessels chartered by the company. 
12.  Implement “walk the talk” safety audits on board vessels.  Vessel supervisors, observe what people 

are doing and challenge the way they are doing it.  

 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to:  IADC Cargo Handling Guidelines found on the IADC web site, Health Safety 
and Environmental Reference Guide Section 12.9 and Alert 02-08. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2004 

