Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 29 
 

TRANSPORTATION FATALITY ACCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  moving  rig  equipment,  a  fatality  and  two  serious  injuries  occurred  at  a  pipe  yard.    When  untied,  the 
pipe rack  fell,  swung  around  and struck  the side  of the  trailer.    All  three  injured  parties were  struck  by  the 
falling pipe rack, two being pinned to the trailer. 
 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The immediate causes were identified as follows;   
 
1.  The pipe racks were not loaded in a safe and stable manner and had not been individually tied down.   
2.  The tie down straps were removed before a secondary securing method was put in place (i.e. forklift).   
3.  All three injured parties were standing in a caught between position while releasing the straps.   
 
In addition, several causes became apparent during the course of the investigation with the primary ones 
described as follows:   
 
1.  There was a lack of written equipment transportation procedures including a written risk assessment for 

the specific task.   

2.  There was lack of competent supervision and the personnel performing this task were inexperienced.  

Because the personnel were inexperienced they had a lack of awareness and/or perception of risks 
involved and there consequences.   

3.  Because the crew was multi-national there was a lack of adequate communication. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 

Implemented written procedures for rig move, including pipe racks.  Procedures to include approved load 
configurations and necessary checklists. 

•  Required  a  dedicated  “Transportation  Supervisor(s)”  to  coordinate  loading  and  unloading  operations 
when  performing  a  rig  move.    The  transportation  supervisor(s)  must  be  onsite  during  loading  and 
offloading  operations.    Ensure  all  supervisors  are  competent  to  the  task  and  have  formal  training  in 
rigging and tie down.  

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
  
•  To  raise  awareness  of  hazards  and  highlight  control  measures  that  need  to  be  implemented  rig 
personnel are to perform risk assessment for specific task.  This assessment process should include all 
personnel involved in the operation (i.e. - rig and transportation contractors).   

•  Deployed suitable and adequate Safety/HSE personnel as required.  
•  Established approved vendor list and minimum standards of transportation companies. 
•  Sought  measures  to  improve  communication  between  all  parties  involved  (i.e.  –  utilize  interpreters, 

review hiring practices).  
Installed  emergency  call  points  within  the  company  pipe  yard  with  a  direct  line  to  the  emergency 
services. 

•  Truck supervisors to be supplied with accurate emergency call out lists and a copy to be kept in each 

•  Repositioned  signs  for  the  drilling  workshop,  detailing  all  the  departments  within  the compound, to the 

roundabout opposite the main entrance. 

• 

 

truck cab. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2006 

