Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 42 
 

RIG MOVE RESULTS IN FALL AND NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A Roustabout was removing a pillar from the side of the road while the derrick was being moved in 
one piece with a derrick dolly.  As the Roustabout was walking along side of the road, just in front 
of the derrick dolly wheels, he stumbled on a lump of gypsum and fell.  As he sat up the outside 
wheel on the derrick dolly brushed his shoulder.  Only a few millimeters closer and the derrick dolly 
would have crushed the Roustabout. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The Roustabout saw that the pillar was going to be struck by the dolly wheels and tried to move the 
pillar in front of the derrick dolly.  Being in a hurry, in sandy conditions, he lost his footing and fell.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Stressed the following to supervisors and rig personnel:   
 
• 

Inexperienced workers need to be shown how to complete tasks.  (JSAs) – Experienced 
workers  must  be  refreshed  on  tasks  and  tasks  hazards  when  understanding  is  not 
apparent. 

•  The  need  for  improved  communication  amongst  team  members  to  ensure  all  employees 

are aware of the whereabouts of team members at all times. 

•  A  Safety  Meeting  is  to  be  held  prior  to  commencement  of  work  to  identify  the  hazards 

associated with all components of rig moves. 
Improved Supervision to observe and identify potential hazards before they occur.   

• 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2003 

