Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 33 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

Incident 1: 

USE OF LOAD BOOMERS RESULTS IN TWO INCIDENTS 

 
Recently there have been two reported incidents resulting from the use of load boomers.   
 

While preparing to unload a large trash container (roll-off box) an equipment operator climbed upon the deck of a Rolligon 
(large-wheeled transport vehicle for crossing artic tundra) to help undo the chain binders/boomer.  The operator was on the 
shadow side of the box on an extremely cold night after having traveled six hours to location.  The Rolligon operator, who 
was responsible for the load, was on the opposite side of the vehicle, unaware of the equipment operator’s actions. 

The  equipment  operator  did  not  notice  that  the  chain  was  twisted  as  he  popped  the  boomer.    When  the  boomer  sprung 
open, the handle rotated and struck him on his right shin.  The force of the impact caused an open wound and fracture of 
the lower right leg. 
 
Incident 2: 
 
Lever type boomer and chains were used to secure a compressor skid on the bed of a three-ton truck for transport.  When 
releasing the LEVER TYPE boomer it moved very quickly and with great force in the direction of the employee.  He was hit 
in the right cheek by the cheater pipe.  Injury resulted in fourteen stitches to the right cheek.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Incident 1: 
• 

• 

 

boomer. 

The job was not the responsibility of the equipment operator but he was trained and wanted to help.  It was not a part 
of his JSA during the pre-job that day. 
The Rolligon operator had loaded and set the binder, he might have known it was twisted or been ready for the shifting 
in the boomer. 

Incident 2: 
• 
•  Employee inserted a cheater pipe over the handle instead of inserting a steel pry bar under the handle to release the 

Failure to follow company and manufacturers procedure when releasing lever type boomer.   

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 

 
•  Consider cam type and ratchet type binders/boomers as a potentially safer option. 
•  Maintain/Regain  Focus  -  external  factors  will  distract  you  from  the  task  at  hand,  weather,  timing,  sense  of  urgency, 

• 
• 

desire to get it done can distract you from focusing on a fairly routine job. 
Line of fire can change at any moment so increase your understanding of where that might be. 
If others are going to help or participate in a routine job, discuss it first with the lead to make sure all are on the same 
page and ready to perform the task. 
Load binders have specific procedures for installation and removal. 

• 
•  When using the lever type boomer, do not use a cheater pipe to release the handle.  If necessary the manufacturer 

and recommends the use of a steel pry bar under the handle and stay out of the line of fire as the handle releases. 

•  Recommended use of double cam or ratchet type binders instead of lever type.   
•  FYI:  An example of Load Binders Safe Working Procedures can be obtained at: 

http://catalog.thecrosbygroup.com/BODY_207.HTM 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2004 

