Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 07  
 

BEE STINGS RESULT IN ANAPHYLACTIC REACTION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
At  two  different  intervals,  two  different  contractors  were  stung  by  bees  and  experienced  allergic  reactions 
while working at two different remote well sites.  In the first event the contractor was working alone and drove 
himself to the hospital.  Throughout the drive he was in phone communication with a co-worker, who ensured 
that he made it to the hospital.  This was a serious potential incident because the injured person’s face had 
begun to swell significantly and impaired his vision.  It could have impaired his ability to breathe if he had not 
received treatment when he did.  In a second incident, a supervisor drove his employee to the doctor.  In this 
case, the injured person was given Benadryl at the work site which prevented a more serious reaction from 
occurring during the 1.5 hour drive to seek medical attention.  This was a serious potential incident because 
the allergic reaction might not have been controlled by the Benadryl. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
It seems that engine vibration emanating from compressors, pumps and generators may attract bees. 
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed  field  personnel  that  a  Pre-Job  Safety  Analysis  should  be  conducted  for  work  on/around 
engines and should include consideration of natural hazards such as bees, wasps and snakes. 
Immediate  action  should  be  taken  to  get  injured  employees  to  a  hospital  ASAP.    It  may  also  be 
appropriate to call for an ambulance to meet the injured employee halfway so that they could administer 
appropriate treatment sooner. 
Instructed  employees  with  known  life-threatening  anaphylactic  allergies  that  they  should  alert  their 
supervisors to their medical condition and should consult a doctor about the advisability of having an Epi-
Pen prescription or antihistamine such as Benadryl that they can carry with them on the job. 
Instructed employees who have to work alone that they should maintain regular contact with someone so 
that  their  approximate  location  is  known  to  others  at  all  times.    Also,  their  contact  person  should  be 
expected to initiate a search if the lone worker does not check in on time. 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2012 

