Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 21 
 

INSTALLING ANNULAR BOP RESULTS IN RWC 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured party (IP) was assisting in the installation of the annular preventer to the BOP stack.  The annular 
was being suspended by the crane at the time of the incident.  The IP was attempting to get one of the nuts 
started  onto  the  BOP  stud  when  he  inadvertently  placed  a  portion  of  his  hand  between  the  nut  and  the 
bottom of the annular preventer.  At the same time the annular shifted position and pinched two of the IP’s 
fingers. 

The pinch point area between the annular body and the BOP bolt where  

the IP placed his left hand fingers. 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
It was determined in the accident investigation that the Annular was being suspended by slings of different 
length and  that  the crane boom was not  extended  far  enough  to  have  the  load  properly centered  over  the 
BOP stack.  Subsequently, the Annular got caught on one side of the BOP bolts and shifted at precisely the 
same time the IP had his fingers in the wrong position. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  The job was immediately stopped and the IP treated for his injuries. 
2.  A safety meeting was held to communicate incident with all crew members.  The JSA was revised and 

reviewed to include identifiable pinch point. 

3.  Crew and crane operator were informed to follow safe rigging/lifting procedures. 
4.  A Safety Bulletin was generated for circulation to other operating rigs. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2008 

