Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 13 
 

 

DROPPED DRAWWORKS PLATFORM 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  the  process  of  lowering  the  draw-works  and  support 
structure  to  the  ground,  one  of  two  35  ton  sheaves  used  in  the 
pulley system failed, causing one side of the draw works structure 
to  fall  3  to  4  meters  (10  to  13  feet)  to  the  rig sub base.  When  the 
structure  collapsed,  five  employees  fell,  resulting  in  major  injuries 
(fractured  bones  and  dislocated  shoulder)  and  first  aid  cases. 
Potential was for multiple fatalities.  The incident also caused major 
damage  to  the  substructure  and  draw-works  resulting  in  the  rig 
being  unserviceable.    A  second  shackle  had  been  added  to  the 
pulley system sheave used to lower the draw-works. This additional 
shackle caused misalignment of the sheave with the direction of the 
load. While  lowering  the platform,  the tension  in  the  pulley system 
increased forcing the sheave plates apart, releasing the sheave pin 
and resulting in immediate release of the cable and draw-works. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Personnel  were 

in  exposed  position  during 

lowering of the draw-works. 

  The  person  in  charge  had  not  performed  the 
operation  before  and  procedures  did  not  give 
detailed  and  clear  guidelines  for  the  rig  down 
operation. 

  Although  experienced  personnel  were  present 
they were not listened to and an extra sheave was 
added to the rigging system.   

  There was a failure in the Management of Change 
(MOC)  by  altering  an  existing  approved  design 
and  the  lack  of  documentation  of  the  rig  down 
procedure to assure consistent performance.  

  Person-in-charge handover did not address safety 

critical tasks. 

  Lifting 

equipment 

inspection 

and 

control 

procedures were not followed. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The rig has been through extensive repair, redesign and recertification by the manufacturer. 
  All design issues and the rig documentation were revised by the manufacturer.  
  Updated rig move procedures to include details of critical safety tasks.  
  Developed lift plans and consider Permit To Work requirements for significant lifts. 
 

Identified  high  risk  areas  during  lifting  and  load  movements  and  removed  personnel  from  these  areas 
during the lifting/loading operation. 

  Confirm lifting equipment is certified and that personnel are competent to perform their tasks. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

