Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 23  

BENT HINGE PIN RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The operation at the time of the incident was pulling out of the hole to change out the drill bit. The bottom-
hole  assembly  (BHA)  was  9  1/2”  drill  collars  with  a  7-5/8”  regular  connection.  This  operation  requires 
110,000 foot pounds of torque. While the rig crew was breaking out the 28” reamer and the shock sub, the 
hinge pin in the manual tong had become bent. This resulted in the release of the tongs, which shot across 
the rig floor. The tong pin that was bent during this operation had been received in the company warehouse 
twelve days before the incident date. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  The parts were stored in the warehouse together with similar pins; 
  The pins were not clearly labeled; 
  The incorrect pin, which was picked up, was for a different type tong model; 
  Rig personnel failed to recognize that they had received an incorrect pin. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

Instructed the warehouse staff of the new tong pin locations; 
Instructed rig crews to verify replacement parts that do not look right and/or fit correctly; 

  Reorganized tong pins into separate bins in the warehouse; 
  Required that  the tong pins going forward be clearly identified and labeled; 
 
 
  Required crew to check the torque specifications for tongs prior to use. 
 [NOTE: Manual drill pipe tongs are rated to maximum torque of 100,000 ft./lbs. When applying torque to 
drill collars, ALL PERSONNEL must stand clear of the area.] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2011 

