Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 12 
 

LACK OF ATTENTION WHILE USING A SLEDGE HAMMER  

RESULTS IN A MASHED FINGER 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured person (IP) was using a hammer to break loose a mud pump liner nut.  He missed the lug on the 
liner  nut  and  the  hammer  glanced  off  of  a  divider  between  the  cylinders.    This  resulted  in  the  employee's 
finger to be mashed between the hammer handle and the divider plate. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Review of the incident revealed that prior to the start of the job the injured employee had been washing down 
the area around the liner nut.  When finished washing down the area he signaled another employee to shut 
off  the  water.    The  other  employee  accidentally  turned  the  water  to  full  pressure,  which  resulted  in  the 
employee preparing to remove the nut to be sprayed with water.  While still in an upset mood the employee 
picked up the hammer and began to swing at the lugs on the nut to attempt to break it loose.  This is when 
the incident occurred. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The  company  instructed  personnel  that  if  they  become  upset  over  something  they  are  to  take  a  step 

 
 

back and settle down before starting a task.  
Instructed workers that they begin a job, they should be totally focused on the job at hand.   
Instructed the employees that when their thoughts are clouded from the previous stress of on-or-off-the-
job related problems they may fail to see the dangers involved in their work.   

  Also, they were instructed that they should always explore the possibility of a better or safer process for 
completing  any  job.  In  this  case,  it  was  decided  that  a  hydraulic  jack  would  be  used  in  the  future  to 
tighten or loosen pump liner nuts. 

 
Crewmen  are  to  stay  focused  and  remember  lack  of  concentration  can  lead  to  injury.    Always  ask 
yourself, "Is there a better or safer way of performing the job?" 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2009 

