Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 47 
 

AIR COMPRESSOR LINE RUPTURE RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After  the  compressor  unit  arrived  on  location,  the  employee  had  connected  the  #2  compressor  to 
start  the  crane.    Shortly  after  starting  the  compressor,  the  low-pressure  relief  valve  popped  off. 
When  the  employee  climbed  onto  the  frame  to  check  the  relief  valve,  the  1-1/2"  stainless  steel 
supply line from the compressor to the volume tank ruptured, striking employee in the face and left 
leg.  The incident resulted in multiple sutures to the face. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
While in the yard the air compressor receiver tank was hooked to the yard supply air line and was used as a 
volume tank.  Both compressor isolation valves on the 1-1/2" supply line from the compressor to the receiver 
tank were closed during that period.  This compressor system had three relief valves in the system with each 
designated for a different purpose.  While used in the yard, the line for the one pressure relief valve line was 
connected to the receiver tank.  With the isolation valves between the compressor and receiver in the closed 
position, the pressure relief valve could not detect the pressure being delivered and therefore could not open 
to divert pressure through the intake causing over pressurization and rupture of the 1-1/2" supply line. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
• 

If the discharge line is equipped with an isolation valve or check valve, it must have a spring loaded relief 
safety valve (pop off) in place between the shut off valve and the compressor as well as the one on the 
tank.  

•  The total relieving capacity of the safety valves shall be rated to prevent pressure in the line or receiver 

from exceeding the maximum allowable working pressure by no more than 10 percent.) 

•  At no time shall a valve of any type be placed between the air receiver and its safety valve or 

valves.  During rig up of any equipment the proper inspection and start up procedures should always be 
followed. Pre-job meetings should be held and written JSAs should be completed or existing ones 
reviewed and updated before proceeding.  

•  Developed procedures to be used when inspecting and hooking up compressor systems.   
•  Supervisory personnel must approve all  modifications to equipment and the company’s 

equipment modification process form must be used. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2002 

