 

 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 
ALERT 02 – 36  
 

HAND GRINDER INCIDENT RESULTS IN ARM LACERATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An employee was using a hand held pneumatic grinder to polish a metal table. (Photo # 1) and the grinding 
wheel got stuck in a joint of the table and broke off. (Photo # 2).  The employee was struck in the forearm and 
lacerated by the broken wheel. (Photo # 3).   
 

Photo #1 

Photo #2 

Photo #3

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The grinder did not have a guard on it at the time of the injury and no PPE was in use.   
•  Upon investigation it was discovered that the grinding wheel was not the right one for the task being 

performed. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed personnel to do the following:   
•  Ensure that the correct grinder guards and work rests are in place, used and inspected before each use. 
The guard for this type of grinder would have a maximum exposure angle of 180 degrees and be located 
between the operator and the wheel. This would deflect pieces away from the operator 
Inspect grinding wheels. This includes but is not limited to: 

• 

o  Visual inspections for cracks, chips, gouges and other damage. 
o  Verifying that the rated wheel speed is greater than that of the grinder. 
o  Checking that the grinding wheel hole fits the arbor correctly. 

•  Ensure that the grinding wheels used are the correct ones for the application. 
•  Require personal protective equipment when grinding.  As a minimum, use safety glasses with side 

shields and a face shield.  Use gloves only when they will not get caught in the grinder.  Hearing protection 
and goggles could be used when the conditions warrant.  
IADC Note:  See Alerts “02 – 33”, “00 – 34”, and “01 – 06” 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2002 

