Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 09 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After  a  scraper  run,  the  crew  was  tripping  out  of  the  hole  with  the 
scarper assembly.  At the time of the incident the driller was racking 
a  full  stand  of  31/8”  diameter  drill  collars  including  a  4½”  rotating 
scraper.    After  landing  the  full  stand  on  the  set  back  area,  the 
derrickman unlatched the elevators and started pulling the stand into 
the monkey board racking fingers.  At that moment the 4½” scraper 
broke apart and separated at the mandrel’s 1¼” service connection. 
 
The 2 upper joints of the drill collar stand fell through the mast hitting 
and dislodging a drill floor walkway and then stuck in the ground. 
 
 

Fallen DC’s 

Failed Service 
Connection

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The work plan had been changed by inserting a – non-routine racking back operation. 
•  Scraper mandrel 1¼” service connection had not been identified by the rig crew supervisor. 
•  There were no company or contractor guidelines for racking small tubulars in the derrick. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig supervisors to update operational procedures to include a statement that “tubulars with a 
minimum diameter of less than 3½” are not to be racked in triples in the derrick.” 
Instructed rig supervisors to update operational procedures to include guidelines that specialist/mandrel 
type tools with a minimum diameter of less than 4¾” diameter are not to be racked in the derrick (e.g. 
rotating scrapers, junk baskets, etc.). 

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2010 

