Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 01 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – CRANE BOOM LATTICE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED:  
 
A near miss resulted when a crane boom lattice broke off and dropped a 100 feet landing on the main deck.  
Fortunately no one was injured, although the severity rating of the near miss incident should be high because 
it could have resulted in a fatality. 
 
The crane was utilizing the main block to offload casing from a supply boat to the rig.  It had also utilized the 
main block to remove a cargo basket from the rig floor.  During one of these operations the fast line hook of 
the crane swung into the boom and hooked on to one of the boom lattices.  While moving the cargo box the 
crane  operator  noticed  that  the  fast  line  had  disappeared  so  he  decided  to  investigate.    He  had  the  deck 
crew report to the helideck so that they might be able to locate the fast line.  The crane operator then began 
booming down to give his crew a better view of the upper boom.  This caused the fast line to tighten and the 
boom lattice broke free of the supports.  The lattice fell approximately 100 feet to the catwalk.  It finally came 
to rest 30 feet away from the catwalk on the starboard pipe rack. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The fast line ball was allowed to hang lower than its normal resting height when not in use.  This allowed it to 
swing into the boom and hook onto one of the lattice braces.  The crane operator was unaware of the 
position of his fast line and did not know that it hooked onto the lattice brace.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  Crane operator and riggers were instructed to revise JSAs to reflect the need for awareness of fast line 

position while working the main block. 

•  Crane operators were instructed to ensure that the fast line ball is located in the proper position when not 

•  All crane operators are to review the Crane Operation’s section of the company’s Safe Work Practices 

in use.   

manual. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2009 

