Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 11  
 

CUTTINGS AUGER AMPUTATES LEG OF RIG CREWMEMBER 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  crewmember  was  helping  to  change  out  shaker  screens.    The  shaker  had  been  isolated  and  the 
crewmember was working in the front of the shaker assembly.  He had one foot in the shaker and the other 
foot in the cuttings slide.  As he leaned toward the shaker in an effort to remove the shaker screen, his foot 
slipped and was caught in the auger.  The auger amputated his right leg at the knee joint.  The auger was 
shut down and the medical team was immediately notified. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The cuttings auger was installed by a third party.  By design, the area between the auger and the shaker was 
left  open  to  allow  the  cuttings  to  fall  into  the  ditch.    The  remainder  of  the  auger  was  protected,  but  the 
existing hazard was not recognized by the crew or the company who installed the system. 
 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed operations personnel that all rigs must immediately conduct a hazard hunt on the shaker 
areas, ensuring that all machinery is effectively guarded.   Where deficiencies are identified the 
machinery should be flagged or locked out and repaired as soon as practicable.  
Instructed rig supervisors to inspect the entire auger system (where applicable) ensuring that no one can 
access any portion of the auger. 

 

  Rig maintenance personnel or third party auger provider are to provide an emergency shutdown for the 
auger system (where applicable) so that it can be accessed from any position along the entire length of 
the auger. 

  Corporate HSE personnel will develop procedures for properly guarding of augers and related systems. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2010 

