Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 12 

DROPPED OBJECT – LOW PRESSURE RISER 

DROPPED 50 FEET 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A low pressure riser weighing four (4) tons dropped 50 feet (15 meters) from the diverter onto the platform 
below.  The 25 foot (7.84 meter) long extension joint, or low pressure riser was secured in the rotary table in 
the diverter spider clamp and the diverter housing was mated to the extension and the securing ring made up 
tight using the C- spanner and hammer.  Once it was secure, the complete assembly was picked up enough 
to release the spider clamp.  The assembly was raised through the rotary table with two roughnecks guiding 
it to avoid any possible hang ups.  No hang ups were noted and the weight indicator was closely monitored.  
At  approximately  four  feet  from  clearing  the  rotary  table,  part  of  the  assembly  dropped  down  through  the 
rotary table landing 50 feet (15 meters) to the platform below. 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The pin end thread had not been fully mated up during a recent 3
allowed fluid to migrate into the threaded area causing corrosion and eventual failure of the thread.  
 
 
 

Condition of threads on parted diverter 

rd

 Party (non OEM) onshore overhaul.  This 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Before carrying out any overhaul and integrity testing ensure the correct Operating Service Procedure 

(OSP) is obtained for the part number of the equipment. 

•  OEM procedures are to be followed by end users and all 3rd Parties. 
•  OEM has been notified of the incident and been asked to provide professional support as appropriate. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2011 

