Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 22  
 

FALLING STEEL PLATE RESULTS IN STRUCK-BY INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was in the process of rigging down their rig.  After lowering the draw works section approximately 8 
feet (2.4m), the crew began work on removing the driller side walking foot in preparation to lower the derrick.  
While  removing  the  driller  side  walking  foot,  a  small  (2  feet  x  2.5  feet  /  61cm  x  76cm),  steel,  floor  plate 
located on the skid at the off-driller side of the draw work fell approximately 12 feet (3.7m) below the drillfloor.  
The steel plate bounced off the sub-structure and then struck an employee, who was working approximately 
6 feet (2m) away from the substructure area.  At the time of the incident, the employee was performing other 
duties and was not involved in the task of removing the walking foot. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The JSA for rigging down the draw works did not include the steps to verify floor plate removal prior to 

moving/lowering equipment. 

•  The rig was previously stationed on a multiple well pad for 10 months and it had only been rigged down 

twice from that pad until the time of incident; therefore: 

o  Only two employees on this crew had multiple experiences with rig up/down for this rig. 
o  There was a lack of familiarity in rig up/down procedures with this style of rig by the current 

crew. 

•  While  rigging  down  the  floor  plates,  it  was  noticed  that  the  bridle  lines  were  crossed  and  the  crew 
immediately  began  to  fix  the  crossed  lines.    After  the  lines  were  put  in  the  correct  position,  no  one 
thought  to  go  back  to  the  initial  job  of  removing  the  floor  plates  to  ensure  that  the  job  had  been 
completed.    

•  The rig personnel stated that they did not realize that the floor plate was separate from the actual floor 

since there were no lifting eyes or cut outs in place that would make it easily noticed as removable. 

o 

It  was also observed  that the plate  was made of that same material and  painted the same 
color as the floor. 

•  The  ground  area  below  the  workers  was  not  sufficiently  cleared  while  the  lay  down  operations  were 

being conducted. 

o  Even  though  the  employee  on  the  ground  was  working  some  distance  away  from  the 

substructure, he was still in the line of falling objects. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  company  revised  the  rig  specific  JSA  to  include  the  removal  of  all  floor  plates  and  verification  of 

removal prior to lowering the draw works section. 

•  Extra JSAs and supervision were provided for rigging up/down.  This is especially important after the rig 

operates for several months without rigging down or if there is a high turnover of employees. 

•  Rig personnel were reminded that whenever work is stopped due to a change in the planned work, they 

must review the JSA steps prior to resuming the intended task. 

•  Rig  personnel  were  directed  to  install  pivot  links  on  all  removable  floor  plates  to  both  assist  in  their 
identification and serve as lifting points for rigging up or down.  If appropriate for visibility, additional color 
will be added to make these points more recognizable.  

•  Rig  personnel  were  reminded  that  the  JSA  shall  include  steps  for  determining  sufficient  safe  distance 
from the substructure for personnel to work while floor and overhead rigging up/down is being performed. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2012 

