Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 04  
 

LOWER MARINE RISER PACKAGE (LMRP) CONNECTOR FAILURE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The U.S. Bureau of Safety & Environmental Enforcement has issued a Safety Alert as the result of a number 
of  incidents  on  rigs  caused  by  a  loss  of  integrity  of  LMRP  H-4  connector  bolts.    BSEE  instructed  the 
operators  of  affected  rigs  to  secure  current  well  operations  and  to  retrieve  the  LMRP  and/or  BOP  to  the 
surface.  These  operators  were  directed  to  suspend  operations  until  the  existing  bolts  on  the  LMRP 
connector/wellhead  connector  could  be  replaced  or  recertified.    Replacement  bolts must  be  certified  by  an 
independent third-party to be in compliance with recommended heat treatment practices, or the existing bolts 
have been examined and certified by an independent third-party that they are fit for purpose. 
 
While  the  BSEE  Alert  only  affects  rigs  operating  in  the  US  Gulf  of  Mexico,  IADC  has  been  informed  of  at 
least one other similar failure occurring elsewhere.  Contractors with rigs using H-4 connectors should take 
steps to ensure the integrity of these connectors to avoid potential failure.  
 

Upper half of failed LMRP Connector 

Lower half of failed LMRP Connector 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  Stress corrosion cracking caused by hydrogen embrittlement is believed to have caused this situation. It 

appears that zinc electroplating without proper baking (per ASTM B633) caused this embrittlement. 
  

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, the following is recommended: 
•  Operators and rig owners should check the bolts of their LMRP and Wellhead connectors to ascertain if 
they may be defective. Information on identifying affected bolts can be obtained by calling GE Oil & Gas 
at +1 (281) 985-3428 (accessible 24 hours a day) or by email at Drilling.Support@ge.com. 

•  Operators  and  Contractors  with  H-4  connectors,  as  identified  through  the  above  source,  should  also 
consult  with  their  contractors  and  subcontractors  to  determine  the  appropriate  inspection,  disposition 
and/or  corrective  actions.  Operators  in  the  US  Gulf  of  Mexico  should  notify  BSEE,  who  will  require  an 
independent  third-party  certification  that  confirms  proper  inspection  and  refurbishment  processes  were 
completed prior to reinstallation of any affected bolts. 

•  Operators and contractors should review the QA/QC programs for all equipment vendors (contracted and 
sub-contracted)  to  ensure  that  all  equipment  is  being  manufactured  to  the  required  specifications. 
Special attention should be given to ensure proper heat treating has taken place in accordance with the 
specifications. 

Source: Bureau of Safety & Environmental Enforcement (www.bsee.gov) 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2013 

