Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 28 
 

FATAL INCIDENT RESULTS FROM 

REMOVED DECK OPENING COVER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A team of 2 subcontractor workers was installing insulation material on piping in the top slab level inside A60 shaft of 
a concrete base structure.  It is believed that one of the workers decided that he needed a board to use for cutting or 
storing of insulation material.  The worker saw a 9 mm plywood board lying on the floor, picked it up on one side and 
started to shake off sandblasting grit from it.  As he was lifting the board (approximately 10 kg) he made a step forward 
and fell into a manhole in the floor that the board he removed was covering.  He fell into the 3 foot (1 m) diameter hole, 
falling  about  40  feet  (12  meters)  down  to  a  concrete  floor  and  hitting  some  piping  on  his  way  down.    The  worker 
received fatal injuries and died in the ambulance on the way to hospital.  The worker died due to severe injuries. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The initial investigation showed that the safety barriers guarding the manhole were removed and not reinstalled in 
place by previous teams working in the area. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Lesson Learned 
 
Incident investigation is still ongoing.  However, some preliminary recommendations can be drawn at this stage:- 
 
•  Ensure there is a documented and functioning isolation process in place to manage removal   and  reinstallation  of 

safety barriers. 
 Ensure that manholes/openings in the floor  
where possible. 

have identifiable covers that can be locked in  

place, 

•  Prevent work in bad lighting, STOP the work if you feel that lighting is inadequate. 
• 
• 

 Ensure people understand the important and practice good housekeeping at worksite.  
 Identify needs for accessing manholes and  
features. 

openings  at  the  design  stage  and  provide  built  in  design  safety 

• 

 

A board covering the manhole. The 

incident area in similar lighting 

Barriers around the manhole after the 

incident with general lighting on 

The manhole 

 

conditions 

IADC Note:  See Alerts 99-01 and 02-48 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2005 

