Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 27 
 

GALLEY FIRE OCCURS DURING DRILL 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  was  conducting  a  scheduled  Well  Control  /  H2S  drill.    All  personnel  had  donned  self-contained 
breathing  apparatus  (SCBAs),  had  mustered  and  were  preparing  to  debrief.    At  that  time  there  was  an 
announcement  over  the  intercom:    “There  is  a  fire  in  the  galley,  this  is  not  a  drill.”    Fire  Fighting  (FF) 
crews were mobilized to combat the fire.  Power to the galley was shut off.  Because of the amount of smoke 
in  the  galley  it  was  difficult  to  determine  the  source.  Investigation  revealed  the  deep  fat  fryer  as  the  fire’s 
source.  CO2 and dry chemical extinguishers were used to put out the fire, and a FF crew was standing by 
with fire hose.  The fire in the fryer was extinguished, but fire was discovered in the vent above the stove and 
fryer which was put out with a fire hose.  Another crew closed off the vent which helped to extinguish the fire. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The deep fat fryer was found in the “on” position, and the temperature control dial was turned to the 
maximum heat setting.  
 
 

Temperature dial for deep fryer.  

 
Although  the  reason  for  the  fryer  left  on  and  temperature  at  max 
heat setting was not determined, it is believed that: 
(1)  In  a rush to  muster  for  the  drill,  personnel simply  neglected  to 
switch  off  the  fryer.    It  is  common  practice  to  set  heat  at  max  to 
heat  up  the  oil  faster.    When  the  oil  gets  hot,  the  heat  is  turned 
down to normal frying temperature.  However, when the drill alarm 
sounded,  the  galley  was  abandoned  quickly  leaving  the  fryer  on 
max temperature; hence, the oil ignited.  
(2) Another explanation is that when the alarm sounded, in a rush 
to  get  to  the  muster  point,  the  dial  was  erroneously  turned  to 
maximum heat instead of the off position.  
 
The hood and vent above caught fire due to grease buildup.  

 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Explained to kitchen crew the following:  

o 

It is safer and better to plan the use of the deep fryer to avoid quick overheating of the oil.  Heat up 
the  oil  at  the  normal  frying  temperature.    This  lowers  the  risk  of  fire  (especially  if  kitchen  work  is 
interrupted or galley personnel need to leave the kitchen for any reason and could forget to turn off 
the fryer.)   

o  Heating at normal temperature prevents having to change oil frequently.  
o  Frying with overheated oil (or “spent” or old oil) can affect the taste of the fried food.     
Informed the Camp Boss of the drill schedule so someone can stay in kitchen and monitor the cooking, if 
that  is  necessary.   Be sure  to rotate  the  kitchen staff  as  monitors  so  all  galley  personnel  participate  in 
drills.  

• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  OIM designated a person to pass through the galley on his way to the muster point to double check that 
all kitchen items (fryers, ovens, stovetops, mixers, etc) have been turned off if a kitchen monitor is not 
assigned.  
Installed a fire extinguishing system with a fusible link for the galley exhaust hood. 

• 
•  Galley crew was reminded of their duties to keep the vent hood clean and free of grease buildup.   
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2008 

