Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 05 – 37 
 

DROPPED OBJECT - IMPROPER RIGGING OF DRUM SLING 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crews aboard one of the rigs in the domestic fleet were in the process of storing drums on the top rack of 
their  horizontal  storage  rack.  (Fig.  1)  While  a  roustabout  was  guiding  the  drum  into  the  rack  the  drum  fell 
approximately 1 to 2 feet because incorrect rigging and landed on the roustabout’s arm. (Fig. 2) Fortunately 
the injury only required some medication for pain and the roustabout was released by the doctor to return to 
work.   
 

 

 

Figure # 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure # 2  

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  The crew incorrectly slung the load. (Fig 3 and 4) 
•  The  JSA  used  prior  to  initiating  the  task  was  not  suitable  for  the  job.  The  JSA  made  no  mention  of 

specialty slings or of even lifting of drums. 

•  Personnel were incorrectly distributed around the load. 
•  The crane operator could only operate the lift as a  “Blind Lift” because of the position of the rack, and 

therefore was unaware of the slinging methods employed to the loads. 

 

 
 

Figure # 3 Incorrect attachment 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure # 4 Correct attachment 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
JSAs  are  not  to  be  used  as  a  tick  box  exercise  prior  to  starting  a  job.  JSAs  are  essential  to  the  safe 
completion of any task that has the potential of injury. 
•  The  company  is  pursuing  alternative  devices  for  the  horizontal  lifting  of  drums  and  will  communicate 

those findings to the fleet. 
If there are routine blind lifts that occur aboard your facility, the operation is to be surveyed with an eye 
for reducing risk of blind lifts. 
If it is felt there is a better way to rig lifts or it is decided that an alternate way of rigging will be used, the 
final decision will come from the Crane Operator and OIM, prior to doing so. 

•  Crews must be aware of their position at all times when working with suspended loads, and ensure that 

there is no way they can be trapped or struck by the load should it drop or change direction. 

• 

• 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2005 

