Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
ALERT 04 – 41 
 

DERRICKMAN PULLED OFF BOARD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Derrickman was tying off a stand of 9” drill collars while the floor crew was placing a single 8” drill collar 
in the mouse hole.  As the 8” collar was being picked up, the rig floor hoist line was dragging upward against 
the front of the derrick board.  The force of the line on the front of the derrick board caused the board to rise, 
pivoting  at the  hinge at the back of the board.  The safety retracting lifeline cable passed under the raised 
board.  Then air hoist line slipped off the board into the alleyway.  The falling board snagged the lifeline and 
the Derrickman was drug across the fingers and off the board.  The Derrickman struck his leg and head.  The 
lifeline  and  full  body  harness  arrested  his  fall  just  below  the  board.    Because  the  Driller  was  on  the  board 
instructing the Derrickman about setting  back the collars he  was able  to assist the Derrickman back to the 
board.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Two  simultaneous  operations  were  taking  place  during  this  incident;  the  Derrickman  was  tying  back  a 
stand of drill collars, and the floor crew was placing an 8” drill collar in the mouse hole.  There was no 
communication between the floor crew and the Derrickman.  Often times the Derrickman is completing 
his task while the floor crew is proceeding with the next task.  The typical procedure for controlling the air 
hoist line riding on the front of the board is for the Derrickman to move the hoisting line to the alley way 
between the board and the fingers as the air hoist operator takes the slack out of the line.   

2.  Hands  free  intercoms  between  the  Driller’s  console  and  the  derrick  board  are  a  Company  requirement 

but it was not being used.   

3.  The storm bar was not closed across the fingers. 
4.  The  Derrickman  is  mostly  alone  in  the  derrick,  ±85-feet  above  the  rig  floor;  yet  his  activities  are  very 

much coordinated with the Floor crew.      

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  This  requires  the  floor  crew  and  the  Derrickman  to work  together  and  good  two-way  communication  is 

2. 

necessary.   
In this case, use of the hands-free intercom may have allowed the Derrickman or the Driller to participate 
in  the  job-planning  meeting  (JSA)  with  the  floor  crew.    Be  sure  your  rig  has  functioning  hands-free 
communications between the console and the derrick board. 

3.  Typical derrick design includes a “storm bar”, consisting of square tubing or round pipe that slides across 
the front of the board.  This not only keeps loose pipe from going across the derrick, but also prevents 
the air hoist line from getting into the fingers or riding on the front of the board.  Does your board have a 
storm bar that functions as it should?  The storm bar could have been used in this situation when picking 
up drill collars from the catwalk with the air hoist. 

4.  Be  aware  of  the  Derrickman  and  the  floor  activities  that  directly  impact  his  work  and  vice  versa.    The 
Driller  is  in  tune  to  the  needs  of  the  Derrickman  and  pays  constant  attention  to  his  activities.    The  air 
hoist  operator  and  floor  crew  should  also  be  continuously  monitoring  the  Derrickman’s  situation  and 
looking up to ensure he is Ok and out of harm’s way.  Talk about how the Derrickman, when he 85-feet 
overhead can be included in your team’s job safety planning (JSA). 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2004 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
View of derrick board and retractable safety line attachment involved in the incident.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2004 

