 

 

 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 04 – 05 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

FATAL ACCIDENT INVOLVING A FLEXIBLE HOSE 

 
A  supply  boat  crewman  was  struck  on  the  head  by  a  flexible  hose  during  pressure  venting  after  transfer  of  bulk  drilling  chemicals.  
Transfer  of  bulk  drilling  chemicals  used  compressed  air  at  a  low  pressure.    On  transfer  completion,  instructions  were  given  to  close  all 
valves, purge and depressurize the transfer lines and disconnect the bulk transfer hose.  The 4" diameter flexible vent hose was lowered 
over the starboard side of the vessel into the sea to prevent dust clouds during venting.  To keep the hose submerged an old valve and 
ballast chain had been secured to its outboard end.  A length of rope was tied between the outboard hose end and the vessel rail to allow 
for hose recovery, leaving about a 4m (13.2 feet) arc of movement between secured points.  
 

 

 
Upon opening the vent valve in the engine room there was a sudden release of compressed air causing the vent hose to whip out of the 
sea onto the deck of the vessel.   
 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 
1.  An uncontrolled release of pressure resulted when the vent valves on the vessel were opened in the wrong sequence.  There were 

no detailed written procedures for the venting process. 

2.  The hose was able to whip out of the sea onto the deck because: 

The hose was not adequately secured to prevent it whipping onto deck. 
Ballast was insufficient to prevent the hose whipping, and acted as a club striking the victim. 
(Note: use of ballast to weigh down a flexible hose is not a safe practice in any case) 
No detailed procedure existed for securing the end of the hose. 
Previous incidents of hoses whipping had been reported in the supply boat fleet but not acted on by fleet management. 

3.  Root Cause – Position of the crewman in a dangerous location due to: 

Crewman apparently ignoring a verbal instruction to clear the area before venting. 
Possible lack of attention.  The crewman had been at sea for 8 months and it was the end of his shift. 
Poor  supervision  and  communications.    The  supervisor  was  in  the  engine  room  to  operate  the  final  vent  valve.    If  the  valve 
operating sequence had been different, a valve on the upper deck could have been opened last.  The deck can be seen from 
this location. 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

Lack of crew training resulted in a lack of safety awareness among the crew individually and generally.   

4. 
5.  No specific safety management system for the boat was documented. 
6. 
7.  Chartering of the supply boat in spite of a negative technical inspection. 

Lack of job safety analysis. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following recommendations to 
prevent recurrence: 

 
1.  Venting operations should be subject to risk assessment (Job Safety Analysis) 
2.  Ensure that hose venting and disconnection procedures are in place and followed.  They should be detailed, contain drawings and 

describe specific safety precautions required.  Results of JSA can be used to prepare procedures. 

3.  The boats should have a Safety Management System that complies with company’s marine specifications. 
4.  Crew safety awareness should be of an adequate standard meaning a training program must be provided. 
5.  Subsidiaries should comply with Headquarters policies for contracted services. 
 

IADC Note:  Thanks to the Marine Safety Forum for sharing this alert with the industry.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2004 

