Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 44 
 

ENERGIZED POWER TONGS RESULT IN FOOT INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  operation  at  the  time  was  running  casing,  which  necessitated  the  use  of  hydraulic  power  tongs.    The 
tongs were suspended by an air hoist and left energized between connections.  During a break while running 
the casing, the decision was made to relocate a bag of protectors to the ‘V’ door.  The hydraulic tongs were 
lowered to the floor left energized with the door open the tugger was removed.  The tugger was then used to 
move the bag of protectors.  Once the bag of protectors had been relocated it became necessary to hook the 
tugger back up to the hydraulic power tongs.  A floorhand assisted the Tong Operator to reconnect the air 
hoist  onto  the  power  tongs  and  in  so  doing  the  floorman  placed  his  right  foot  between  the  door  openings.  
During the process of hooking up the air hoist, the spring on the lifting assembly engaged causing the gear 
mechanism to rotate which resulted in the floorman’s foot being caught.  The resulting injury led to the partial 
amputation of the right foot forward of the ankle. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The tongs were left energized while other work was being performed on the rig floor.  When reconnecting the 
air hoist, the injured party engaged the tong throttle, while his right foot was in the open throat of the tongs, 
causing the rotating gear to contact the top of the right foot.  The tong was not equipped with a door interlock 
device, which prevents the operation of the rotating gear if the door of the tongs is open.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  Whenever it becomes necessary to stop the use of ANY power tongs for a time period longer than 
that  between  normal  connections  during  the  running  of  tubulars,  the  power  unit  will  be  shut  off  in 
compliance with the appropriate policy. 

•  Pressure to be bled off from the lines so as to eliminate any power source to the unit. 
•  A thorough review of JRAs and procedures covering the use of hydraulic power tongs.  
•  Please  ensure  that  this  is  discussed  in  pre-tour  and  weekly  safety  meetings  until  everyone  is  fully 

aware of it. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2004 

