Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 25 
 

WELDING ON A TRUCK TIRE RIM RESULTS  

IN A SERIOUS INCIDENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A truck rim had a hairline crack and the maintenance personnel decided to repair it by welding.  After welding 
on the rim, a new tire was mounted to the rim and pressured to 20 to 40 psi to test the weld.  Leaks were 
found on the hub weld so the person in charge decided to weld the leaking areas from the hub side while 
pressure was inside the tire.  A few minutes after the welds were completed a violent release of energy from 
the  tire  launched  it  from  the  floor  of  the  shop  to  the  roof.    The  incident  occurred  inside  a  transport 
maintenance  workshop  where  support  and  maintenance  activities  were  being  performed.    The  explosion 
resulted in two (2) fatalities and two (2) injured persons among the (8) people that were in the workshop at 
the time, and 3 others who were nearby.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Welding on a single piece rim with a pressurized tire. 
  The person in charge / supervisor assigned an unqualified welder to weld on a wheel rim mounted with a 

  Not making use of all required safety equipment, including PPE and tire cages that were only a few 

pressurized tire. 

meters away. 

  Failure to recognize the risks involved in the operation  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Instituted a robust system that ensured: 
 
  The company instituted a screening program for small sub-contractors performing miscellaneous minor 

services on-site.  

  The company instructed supervisors that all personnel, including “day pass workers”, are to fully 

participate in mandatory site training and that the workers have been checked for competency against 
the jobs they were expected to perform.   

  Rigorous screening of contractor activities was instituted to identify high risk activities (e.g. tire repairs) 

where industry lessons learned were available to flag risks and special training is required for workers to 
execute the job safely. 

  The company assigned competent skilled supervisors and safety representatives to cover this “non-

primary” work area. 

  The company increased efforts on the communication of hazards via Task Instructions or Toolbox Talks.   
  Site supervisors were instructed to conduct these meetings on a regular basis to make workers fully 

aware of “what to do” and equally importantly “what not to do”.   

  Supervisors were instructed to ensure that Tool Box Talks or Task Instructions are job specific enough to 

truly convey the understanding of the hazards involved and not just a “tick-the-box” exercise.   

  Supervisors were instructed to ensure that they empowered all workers to stop the job and to be 

proactive in promoting safety.  This is to be visibly happening everyday not on rare exceptions! 

 
 
IADC Note:  See the video created by “Standards Testing Labortory Inc.”  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HiLeji8bLOk  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Photos of Tire and Shop 

 

 
Weld area from hub side 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2010 

