Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 21 
 

TORCH CUTTING OPERATIONS RESULTS IN A FIRE  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Personnel were using a cutting torch to cut off several wall-mounted brackets on the outside of a mechanic 
shop  wall  on  a  barge  rig.    During  the  process,  personnel  noticed  smoke  coming  from  an  adjacent  room.  
Personnel went to investigate and discovered that the room was locked.  After getting the room open, it was 
determined that there was no fire.  No injuries resulted. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The inside wall of the adjacent room had been newly painted and during the cutting process, the paint began 
burning filling the shop with smoke.  The opposite side of the wall had not been inspected prior to initiating 
the cutting procedure. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig supervisors in the 
following: 
 

The  Company’s  HSE  manual  states  that:  “If  combustible  materials  are  found,  isolate  those  combustibles 
from potential sources of ignition.”  The near miss report stated the corrective action taken as “Cutting and 
welding should not proceed when the fire watch cannot view all surrounding or adjacent areas.”  This is an 
excellent  corrective  action  that  supports  the  company  HSE  manual  policy  on  isolating  combustibles.    To 
discover the presence of potential combustibles, the surrounding area must be surveyed completely. 

This incident is similar to another occurrence this year where combustibles on the other side of a wall were 
not considered which did resulting in a fire.  These incidents have led us to modify the HSE manual, “Steps 
to be taken in issuing a hot work permit” to read: 

•  Observe  an  area  of  at  least  35’  around  the  hot  work  site,  including  inside  adjacent  rooms,  walls  or 
barriers, as well as upper and lower levels.  All potential sources for ignition must be addressed before 
work can begin. 

This “bullet” item will be included in the next update of the company’s HSE manual. 

A Hot Work Permit should not be issued until the surrounding and adjacent areas have been inspected for 
combustibles.   

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2007 

