Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 30  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 

FAILURE TO TORQUE LIFT SUB RESULTS IN DROPPED MONEL DRILL COLLAR 

During tripping operations, the crew was in the process of making up the bottom hole assembly.  The monel drill collar was brought up 
to the rig floor by the pipe-cat.  A lifting sub was placed into the box end of the monel drill collar and screwed together with chain tongs.  
The drill collar was then picked up with the top drive elevators and pushed out of the way so a stabilizer could be picked up and placed 
in the mouse hole.  The monel drill collar was then placed into the stabilizer, made up and torqued with the iron roughneck.  The bottom 
hole assembly (BHA) was picked up out of the mouse hole with the top drive and pushed out of the way so a float sub could be brought 
to the rig floor.  The float sub was then stood up and placed in the jaws of the iron roughneck and the monel/stabilizer assembly was 
stabbed into it.  Chain tongs were used to make up these two sections while the iron roughneck was used as back up on the float sub.  
The iron roughneck was then used to make up the float sub to the stabilizer. 
 
At  some  point  while  the  crew  was  making  up  the  float  sub  to  the  stabilizer,  the  lift  sub  unscrewed  from  the  monel.    When  the  iron 
roughneck was removed, the BHA, which was sitting on the rig floor, fell out of the V-door and land on the pipe-cat. 

 

 

 

 

Monel Drill Collar 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 

• 

The lifting sub that was placed into the monel drill collar was made up with chain tongs without being torqued before being 
lifted with the top drive.  No one stopped the job to insure the connections were properly torqued. 

•  No one was watching the lifting sub to insure it was not coming unscrewed while the connection was being made between the 
float sub and the stabilizer.  The iron roughneck was spinning the connection together at the bottom which allowed the lifting 
sub to twist out in the opposite direction at the top/overhead. 
There  was  no  direct  supervision  watching  over  the  operation  to  insure  the  task  was  completed  “per  standard  procedure”, 
torqueing the connections. 

• 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

•  All equipment being lifted overhead with a lifting sub, lifting eye, etc., should be properly torqued to the manufacturer’s 

recommendation before being raised to the vertical position. All personnel must utilize the stop work authority, never take short 
cuts, and complete the task as required. 
The idea of drawing a chalk line on the lifting sub to the collar was discussed and to designate someone to visually watch the 
lifting sub to insure it does not back out of the connection. 

• 

•  Moving forward and for future operations it will now be required that the operator’s well site supervisor, directional driller or 

MWD employee must be present on the rig floor in addition to the tool pusher while working the BHA.   

•  Utilize the stop work authority to stop the job until all required personnel are present. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2013 

