Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 46 
 

FALL FROM MUD PUMP 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A derrickman opened the relief valve to bleed off the mud pump then made repairs to stop the end 
cap leakage.  After repairing the mud pump, the derrickman instructed an employee to ensure the 
valve  to  the  main  discharge  line  was  completely  open.    The  employee  operated  the  valve.  
Meanwhile,  the  derrickman  called  the  driller  to  start  pumping  with  both  pumps.    The  derrickman 
noticed returns from the pop off relief line and instructed a second employee to close the bleed-off 
valve.  Upon closing the bleed-off valve the pop off valve blew causing a piping “T” after the pop off 
valve to split, releasing pressure/mud and the employee near the “T” fell backwards.  The employee 
received a lacerated hand.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
No pre-job meeting was held, and no JSA developed/reviewed.  Derrickman assumed his assistants 
knew the procedure and the equipment (determining if a valve is open/closed).  An employee was 
allowed to climb onto operating equipment.  No evidence of lock out/tag out procedures in place.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
• 
•  Teamwork and communication is the key to any successful job.   
•  REMEMBER to review the JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS (JSA).  
•  When something is not completely right the job should be immediately shut down and re-evaluated.   
•  Valves should always be double checked to ensure proper alignment before pumping commences, never 

Instructed personnel to follow lock out/tag out procedures.  

assume.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2002 

