Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 30 
 

CASING RUNNING OPERATION RESULTS IN LTI 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
WWhhiillee   rruunnnniinngg   77--55//88””   ccaassiinngg,,   aa   FFlloooorrmmaann   wwoorrkkiinngg   iinn   tthhee   ssttaabbbbeerr   ppoossiittiioonn   wwaass   aatttteemmppttiinngg   ttoo   hhoolldd   aa   ccaassiinngg  
cceennttrraalliizzeerr   aabboovvee   tthhee   ccaassiinngg   ttoonnggss..      AAss   tthhee   ttoonnggss   wweerree   bbrroouugghhtt   ffoorrwwaarrdd   tthhee   FFlloooorrmmeenn’’ss   rriigghhtt   hhaanndd   wwaass  
ccaauugghhtt   aanndd   ppiinncchheedd   wwhheenn   tthhee   ccaassiinngg   ttoonnggss   wweerree   aaccttuuaatteedd..      TThhee   FFlloooorrmmaann   wwaass   ddiiaaggnnoosseedd   wwiitthh   aa   llaacceerraattiioonn  
aanndd  aa  bbrrookkeenn  bboonnee  iinn  hhiiss  rriigghhtt  hhaanndd..  
 

 

 

Casing Tong and Centralizer 

Casing Tong around Casing 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The injured man did not realize that he had placed his had in a pinch point.   
•  The  pre-job  hazard  assessment  did  not  recognize  the  hazard  that  may  result  from  attempting  to 

secure casing centralizers while making up the casing.   

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company reviewed the following lessons 
learned: 
 
•  Thorough pre-job hazard assessments must be held before each job.  All workers involved must attend 

the meetings, participate, and understand thoroughly what their roles and duties are. 

•  During pre-job safety meetings, all pertinent guidelines, SOPs, and Hazard Recognition Worksheets 

must be reviewed. 

•  Should any scope or part of the job change, stop the job and reassess how to do the job safely 
•  During every job it is crucial that everyone stay focused to the job at hand 
•  Everyone must remember to stop any job that they feel is unsafe.  The job must not resume until all 

hazards and mitigation steps are in place, communicated, and understood by all involved. 

•  Workers must not hold objects above the casing tong. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2008 

