Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

ALERT 04 – 27 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – AIR TUGGER HOOK 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The hook from the tubular pull back tugger in the derrick fell to the drill floor while tripping out of the hole.  The 
tugger hook was of a design with a clevis pin through the hook attachment eyes held in place by a cotter pin.  
The cotter pin had been installed prior to the start of the trip out of the hole.  It is assumed that the pin was 
defective and came away; allowing the clevis pin to back out of the chain loops and allowing the tugger hook 
to  fall  to  the  drill  floor.    The  weight  of  the  hook  was  approximately  7ozs  (210gms)  and  fell  from  a  height  of 
approximately 90 feet (28m). 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Design of the hook attachment eyes requiring use of the clevis pin secured by a cotter pin. 
2.  Visual inspection only conducted prior to use – not physical inspection. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Replaced hook arrangement with new design featuring improved safety features. (see photos).  New 

design has clevis pin through the hook attachment eyes.  The securing roll pin can only be inserted from 
one side and has no external surfaces exposed to possible interference.  Removal of the attachment pin 
can only be achieved by first driving out the roll pin and then driving out the clevis pin. 

2.  Update JSA to include physical inspection of equipment prior to use. 
 
Old Style Hook: 

 

 

 

 

 

New Style Hook to be used:   

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2004 

 

 

