Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

FLASH FIRE AT DEGASSER LINE FLARE PIT INJURES WORKER 

 

 
ALERT 05 – 34 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

incident.  

While workers were circulating well gas through the choke with the annular closed SIDPP (Shut In Drill Pipe 
Pressure @ 350 kpa [51 psi]), it was noticed that the fire in a pail, positioned under the degasser line, had 
extinguished.  On the Rig Manager's order, the rig stopped pumping, and the HCR valve was closed, shutting 
in the well.  The Rig Manager then instructed a worker to go to the end of the degasser line at the flare pit and 
to re-ignite the contents of the pail.  The worker attempted to light the contents of the pail with his personal 
cigarette lighter, and a flash fire resulted from the spark of his lighter, igniting the methane gas venting from 
the opening at the end of the degasser line.  As a result, the worker was seriously injured, with second degree 
burns to his hands and face. 

•  The mud weight was too low. Gas kicks were circulated out seven times during the week prior to the 

•  No remote ignition kit was available on location.  
•  There was no pre-job safety meeting.  
•  A gas detection device was not utilized prior to attempting ignition.  
•  The injured worker was not wearing his fire-retardant coveralls properly prior to the attempted ignition. 

(The sleeves were rolled up to the elbows.)  

•  Sufficient time was not spent venting or properly purging the gas in the degasser line prior to ignition. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to 
rig personnel: 
 

•  Drill with a heavier mud system to improve well conditions relating to gas kicks.  
•  Create a JSA (Job Safety Analysis) on both "Circulating gas through choke" and "Ignition of gas flare at 

end of degasser line."  

(e.g. JSAs).  

•  Acquire a remote ignition kit, and develop a safe work plan to implement its use.  
•  Develop an action plan to train and mentor workers on the pro-active risk and hazard assessment tools 

 
Train all personnel on a gas detection device and proper use and maintenance of fire-retardant coveralls. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2005 

