Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 32 
 

RESIDUAL PRESSURE IN BOP RESULTS IN FINGER BEING TRAPPED 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The IP was assisting in the operation to close the BOP doors.  As the door was closing the gasket slipped.  
The IP gave the signal to stop closing the door via radio to stop.  On hearing the signal the Toolpusher at the 
control panel, put the control lever to the stop position. 
 
Due to the residual pressure in the control lines, the BOP door continued to close for a few seconds.  During 
this time the Injured Person placed his hand between the BOP door and the BOP body in order to replace 
the gasket.  The closing door trapped the IP’s hand between the BOP door and body.  The IP was examined 
by the rig doctor and it was decided to send him to a hospital for further examination and precautionary x-ray. 
 
No broken bones or muscle damage were sustained and the IP returned to full duty.  The case was classified 
as an MTO.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
• 
•  Failure to recognize the hazard. 
•  Poor supervision of task. 
•  Poor knowledge of the system. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Operation was stopped and a Safety meeting held before re starting the task.  
• 
 
Action to Prevent Reoccurrence:  
 
•  Hand and Finger injury prevention campaign put underway. 
 
Lessons Learned:    
 
•  When using hydraulic or pressured systems the equipment may continue to move even after the control 

JSA was revised to include the residual pressure hazard. 

IP had been newly promoted to Assistant Driller. 

lever has been closed. 

•  Make sure that only experienced personnel are involved in these tasks. When this is not possible then a 

senior supervisor must be in present for careful oversight. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2006 

