Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 34  
 

NEAR MISS INCIDENT BREATHING APPARATUS - VALVE FAILURE  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A three month air sample analysis was to be conducted.  A random Breathing Air (BA) cylinder was to be 
sent for testing.  The BA cylinders are stored in a horizontal rack in the Emergency Response container.  The 
bottle was grasped by the valve on the end which is the accepted means of lifting BA bottles  Upon lifting the 
cylinder  by  the  valve  from  the  horizontal  position  a  loud  escape  of  air  was  heard  and  the  bottle  was 
wrenched from the employee’s hand.  He realized what had occurred and vacated the ERT container.  Once 
the  noise  had  ceased  he  looked  into  the  container  to  find  the  valve  had  separated  from  the  BA  cylinder.  
Upon inspection of the cylinder and valve it was found that the threaded brass tube section of the valve had 
sheared at the neck of the BA cylinder.  The BA cylinder pressure at the time of the incident was between 
200 – 240 bar (2900 – 3480 PSI).  The BA cylinder had been hydro tested on 16/12/2005.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Inspection  of  the  valve  and  cylinder  shows  signs  that  at  some  time  in  the  past  the  cylinder  had  been 
dropped. This assumption was based on the following: 
 
1.  There was a definite bend and sign of stress in the threaded tube section of the valve.  
2.  The valve shaft was bent under the rubber tap cover.  
3.  The threads were squashed on one side of the threaded tube section indicating it had been bent at some 

stage.  

4.  The cross section of the break in the threaded tube section is dull and looks like an old break.  
5.  There is a section on one side that is considered, due to its shiny surface, to be a recent break and it has 

a sheer or tear appearance (photos attached).  

 
It is not known when the valve was bent however the cylinders are regularly visually inspected as part of a 
monthly  maintenance  program.    The  bottle  had  been  swapped  out  for  one  holding  higher  pressure  and 
placed in the “to be filled rack”.  The requirement to visually inspect BA bottles prior to use is part of training 
but is not formally stated and additionally there are no indications of what to inspect.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed personnel in the 
following: 
 
1.  Continue with integrity testing program.  
2.  Visually inspect all cylinders for damage or corrosion. 
3.  Place signs in the ERT container indicating the need for visual examination of all bottles prior to and after 

4.  ERT members and other BA users to be briefed on the incident reinforcing the need for care, handling 

use. 

and inspection 

5.  Restate the need for reporting any incident which may have damaged a BA cylinder. 
6.  Safety Alert to be sent to all operations and the company alert database. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

 

Valve alignment with BA bottle and bent valve 

Cross section showing new and old fractures 

under rubber cap 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2006 

