Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 15 – 10  

 

 

 

 

 

FATALITY ON DRILL FLOOR 

WHAT HAPPENED:   
A drill crew was in the process of running a 36” casing string on a 6 5/8” landing string. They had run 31 stands of 6 5/8” landing string 
with no problems. The hydraracker (HR) was positioned and latched onto stand 32. After getting verbal confirmation from the spotter 
that  the  finger  latches  were  open,  the  HR  operator  attempted  to  remove  stand  32  from  the  finger  boards.  The  stand  was  retracted 
towards the HR but got blocked by a finger on the lower finger board. See photo below. The HR operator continued to retract the HR 
arms. With all 3 arms in a retracted position and the stand still held firm behind the finger latch, energy became built up in the stand. 
This  energy  was  suddenly  released  when  the  latches  of  the  HR  lower  tailing  arm  could no  longer  withstand  the  forces,  allowing  the 
stand  to  recoil  back  towards  the  setback  area,  striking  the  IP  who  was  engaged  in  the  operation  and  unaware  that  he  had  placed 
himself in the line of fire. See diagram below. His injuries were immediate and fatal.  

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
Investigation is still ongoing and exact causes may not be released yet. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
All Rigs to review this alert with crew members at pre-tours and weekly safety meetings and include discussions regarding line of fire 
hazards (especially as related to the release of stored energy). 

All Rigs to verify that when performing similar operations, the opening and closure of fingers in the finger board is being observed and 
communicated, from a position that avoids exposure to line of fire of a sudden release of stored energy or moving equipment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect 

the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

Copyright  2015 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

their own situations and practices 

Issued November 2015 

