Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 23 
 

BLOCKS DROP TO RIG FLOOR 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While pulling out of the hole with the first stand of 5” drill pipe to change the BHA, the 3/4” make up cable 
had  been  removed  from  the  rotary  tongs  and  replaced  with  a  3/4  “  snub  line.    During  the  change  out,  the 
make  up  cable  was  dropped  down  between  the  drawworks  and  snubbing  post  which  was  in  line  with  the 
brake linkage. As it fell, the thimbled eye on the cable became wedged under the brake linkage.  This was 
unknown  to  the  driller.    When  the  driller  disengaged  the  clutch  and  tried  to  apply  the  brakes,  the  wedged 
thimbled eye on the cable kept him from doing so and the blocks fell to the rig floor.  No injuries occurred as 
the floor had been cleared of all personnel. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The employee did not assess the hazard of dropping the thimble eye and cable in the slot between 

•  The moving parts of the brake linkage were unguarded which allowed this and any other object to 

the drawworks and the snubbing post. 

become wedged under the linkage. 

•  Pre job planning was not adequate to be certain that all equipment was in safe working order. 
•  Attention to house keeping was lacking 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Safety meetings were held with crews to discuss the importance of assessing the hazards of each action 

taken while performing a job. 

•  The Elmago/ HydroMatic is to be kept engaged at all times during the tripping operation. 
•  A proper guard was fabricated to cover the brake linkage and installed to prevent recurrence. 
•  A pre job checklist for tripping out of the hole was written to cover all steps of the operation and 

•  Supervisors and crews were to make certain that every tool, line, or other loose items have a designated 

equipment functionality 

place for storage when not in use. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2005 

