Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 30  

HIGH POTENTIAL DROPPED OBJECT INCIDENTS 

RESULT IN TWO LTIs 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two  lost  time  incidents  occurred  on  two  separate  occasions  where  two  employees  were  struck  by  falling 
rubber guides from the Top Drive Back Up Wrenches (BUW). 
 
Incident  one:    The  rig  had  finished  drilling  and  was  in  the  process  of  making  a  wiper  trip.    The  driller 
attempted to break the stand at the top drive connection.  The BUW was positioned incorrectly grabbing one 
part of the X-over sub.  The torque boost was used to break the connection at upper well control valve safety 
clamp.    This  resulted  in  the  safety  clamp  falling  on  top  of  the  BUW.    The  driller  proceeded  to  pick  up  the 
stand and make made up the connection at the rotary table.  As the driller started pulling the drill string, the 
lower safety clamp resting on the bottom part of the BUW caught the stabbing rubber guides and sheared 
the holding bolts which resulted in rubber guides falling 95 feet to floor striking injured person. 
 

Incident  two:    While  pulling  out  of  the  hole  to  make  up  a  new  bottom  hole  assembly,  the  assistant  driller 
broke out the TD connection at the monkey board.  He then picked up the blocks to check to see that the top 
drive was screwed out of the stand.  He then lowered the blocks which hit the top of the stand.  The rubber 
guide’s  holding  bolts  sheared  off  and  the  rubber  guides  fell  to  the  rig  floor  approximately  100  feet.    The 
injured person was struck in the face and cheek.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
In both of these incidents it was noted that there was a failure by the crew to identify that the BUWs were 
positioned  improperly.    Poor  communications  occurred  between  drillers  and  derrickmen  in  each  incident.  
The  Top  Drive  must  not  be  set  down  on  the  pipe.    The  torque  boost  was  improperly  used  to  break  a 
connection  as  stated  in  the  first  incident.    The  BUW  cylinder  adjustment  pins  require  proper  calibration  to 
avoid grabbing the crossover sub.  The JSA was not adequate in identifying such hazards.   

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The driller is responsible in his operation to see that the Top Drive is not set down on the pipe. 
  The driller needs to make sure the BUW is aligned in the center to the pipe as the TD is lowered. 
  The driller needs to make sure that the monkey board cameras are operable and used. 
  Additional training may be required for the Driller to understand the operation of breaking out drill pipe 

from the Top Drive. 

  There is simply no substitute for good communication between the driller and the derrickman. 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2010 

 

 

