Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 26 
 

LINE-OF-FIRE INCIDENT RESULTS IN MEDICAL TREATMENT CASE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The crew of a hybrid well service rig had pulled the lubricator to the surface to bleed off the pressure in it. An operator was using an 
aerial lift to unthread the "Otis" connection on the 10 k stack.  The operator unthreaded the nut, and then the rig manager attempted to 
separate  the  connection  by  lifting  up  on  the  injector/lubricator  assembly.    The  lubricator  was  binding  on  top  of  the  BOP,  and  the 
operator  in  the  aerial  lift  remained  in  position  behind  the  assembly  to  direct  the  rig  manager  as  to  which  way  to  move  the  injector 
carriage to free the lubricator.  The rig manager was following the operator's directions, and as there was weight pulled into the lube 
assembly, when the rig manager hit the correct spot,  the lubricator assembly sprung free of the BOP stack and sprung backwards, thus 
striking the operator in the aerial lift in the face and knocking him down.  The operator was able to regain his stance and bring the aerial 
lift  down  to  the  ground  under  his  own  power.  He  was  evaluated  by  the  on-site  medic  and  sent  for  further  medical  treatment.    The 
operator underwent an MRI, was diagnosed and underwent surgery to repair a fractured cheekbone and misaligned orbital socket. His 
recovery time is estimated to be 4 weeks, after which a light duty program should be able to be instituted. 

Image 1 is the position of the employee before being 

Image 2 is the approximate kick of the lubricator stack. 

 

struck. 

 

Image 3 is the employee being struck by the lubricator. 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

The lubricator assembly sprung free off the top of the BOP stack and sprung backwards, striking the operator in the Aerial lift in the 
face and knocking him down. 
The  crew  had  not  identified  a  potential  stuck  connection  nor  the  stored  energy  that  could  be  released  during  the  disconnection 
process. 

• 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
Investigation identified the following: 
• 
• 

The company will endeavor to find an engineering solution to prevent the lube from kicking out of the BOP. 
The JSA procedure has been changed, to identify the hazard and ensure that all personnel are clear before the lubricator assembly 
is lifted off the top of the BOP stack. 
The company will also reinforce the importance of pausing and identifying any new hazards when the scope of a job changes. 
There will be an internal hazard alert sent out 

• 
• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect the position of 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

their own situations and practices 

Issued September 2014 

