Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 17  
 

THIRD-PARTY CRANE AND CRANE OPERATOR SUPERVISION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A rig was being prepared for loading out and transporting from a third-party rig up and commissioning site.  
The task at hand was to lower the main sub base section (weight 12 ton) of a 750 hp carrier-mounted rig.  A 
third-party crane and operator was being used to rig down the main components.  The onsite Rig Manager 
was directing the loading process at the time of the incident.  A 25-ton crane had been engaged to lower the 
main sub base and rig floor section to the ground level.  The load needed to be lifted and moved to the right 
for storage of the sub base.  The crane operator had jibbed out all stages of the boom prior to taking control 
of the load.  During this operation, the crane operator was using his cell phone.  One of the rig crewmen was 
on the rig floor section knocking out the pins from the stabilizer beams.  It would appear that there was slack 
in the lifting sling and following the removal of the last pin the full weight of the sub base was suddenly taken 
up by the 25-ton crane.  The last section of the extended boom failed and buckled under the weight.  This 
caused the sub base / floor section to free-fall to the ground approximately 12-14 ft. The employee on the rig 
floor  section  who  was  knocking  out  the  pins  managed  to  “ride”  the  load  to  the  ground  and  escaped  any 
injury.  Damage to the sub base structure consisted of bending and stress to the main six stabilizer beams.  
The crane was left in position following this incident and all personnel cleared of immediate area.  The area 
was barricaded off while inspections and investigations into this incident took place. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. 
2. 
3.  No JSA performed before the task. 
4.  Poor decision making by crane operator to use mobile phone during lifting/lowering operation.  Very poor 

Incorrect positioning of crane by operator.  The rigging crew failed to recognize potential lifting hazard. 
Inadequate supervision and crane directives. 

supervision by allowing this practice to occur. 

Incorrect position of the employee who was knocking out the pins. 

5.  Miscalculation of load weight and incorrect methods of load bearing positions. 
6.  Failure to conduct pre-job safety meeting.  Step Back 5x5 Safety Tool not utilized as recommended. 
7.  Senior Site Manager was not on location at time to offer expertise in lift. 
8. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Personnel involved in the lift are to hold a JSA and identify the hazards before the task is done. 
•  Lift personnel are to utilize the company’s pre job 3rd party equipment check list. 
•  Site supervisors are to check crane operator certifications for competency on the operating of hire 

equipment. 

•  Because of potential injury or equipment damage site personnel are to correctly use the Permit to Work 

• 

check off list for heavy lifts. 
Improve line of communications from Senior Rig Site Personnel on their responsibilities and duties when 
ever Senior Site Manager is off location.  

•  Use of competent and ticketed Dog man / Signal man for directing all loads as required on rig 

•  To avoid shock load the crane operator is to be sure that the package weight is taken up by the crane 

construction site. 

prior to the pins being moved.   

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2008 

