Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 10 
 

USE OF ROPE FOR ELEVATOR HOBBLE RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Rig crew was pulling the drilling string out of the hole to prepare for final logging in the well.  
First stand of drill pipe had been pulled out and racked back.  The elevators were lowered 
and latched onto second stand, crew had checked that elevators were closed correctly, but 
as  the  driller  lifted  the  stand  approximately  1.5  meters  (5  feet)  the  elevators  suddenly 
opened,  and  the  drill  string  fell  into  the  hole.    The  roughneck  who  had  been  pulling  slips, 
was moving back from the rotary table when the force of the elevators opening caused them 
to hit the roughneck.  The left horn of the elevator struck on the right side of his head behind 
the ear region.  This force of the impact pushed him, causing him to land approximately 1.5 
meters (5 feet) from the rotary table and the point he was standing when struck.  Operations 
were halted, IP (Injured Person) assisted onto stretcher  and transferred to nearby medical 
clinic.    An  assessment  was  made  and  he  was  medivaced  to  the  nearest  hospital.    The  IP 
was released from the hospital ten days later.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A contributing factor could have been the piece of rope used as a hobble prevented the latch on the elevators from closing 
completely.    The  rope  was  tied  around  the  right  hand  horn  (section  closest  to  elevator  body)  of  the  elevators.    The 
elevators  have  been  tested  and  proven  to  be  fault  free.    Following  investigation  and  checking  of  equipment,  talking  to 
crewmembers  and  verifying  the  checking  of  latch  being  closed,  it  was  concluded  that  the  rope  could  have  inadvertently 
contributed towards this incident.  Drilling practices and policy state, while POOH hobble is not normally used, even if used 
in this instance use of correct hobble would have eliminated the possibility of replacing rope jamming” latch. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All crews notified about nature and potential 

consequences of the incident. 

•  Rope to be removed from elevators, hobble 

acquired for use in future operations, but only if 
policy states hobble is going to be used. 

•  Continue to conduct safety meetings prior to all 
such operations.  Encourage crewmembers to 
conduct Step Back 5X5 work place Safety Meetings.  

•  Use of JSAs to state that crews to check prior to 

such operations.  First if hobble is required during 
running of drill pipe. 

•  Secondly, if hobble is required, correct equipment is 

used and checked for condition prior use.  

•  Correct Policy and Procedures to be followed during 

all Operations. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2004 

