Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 04  
 

IMPROPER USE OF JACK RESULTS IN FINGER INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The operation was to adjust a rotary table on the rig floor for the fitting of safety pins.  A hydraulic jack was 
being used to move the rotary table to the correct alignment.  The hydraulic jack slipped out of position under 
pressure and struck the supervisor on his left hand.  His left hand and arm then struck the side of his face on 
recoil causing minor bruising.  The onboard medic applied sutures to the middle finger of his left hand and 
dressed the wound.  There was no evidence of any fracture to the finger or his facial area. 
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

         

 

  An engineering request had not been raised to address the rotary table pinning misalignment; 
  A Job Hazard Analysis (JHA/JSA) was not prepared or reviewed for this task; 
  Discussions took place but a Step-Back 5x5 that included a work stoppage did not occur; 
  Lack of oversight as the supervisor was performing the task initially given to a floorman; 
  Failure to understand risk of holding an energized hydraulic jack in place with your hands. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

Instructed employees to stop the job whenever the work changes; 

 
  Reminded supervisors to not be involved in tasks they have assigned to others; 
 

Instructed  employees  to  report  any  engineering  difficulties  /  suggested  modifications  as  soon  as 
possible; 

  Ensure the clinic and trauma bag are fully stocked at all times and remind employees that the medic 

does not use sutures without first informing the OIM; 
Implemented a better hand protection program and improve supply chain delivery issues. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2012 

