Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 18 
 

MAKING UP SUB ASSEMBLY RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  crew  was  using  the  top  drive  and  back-up  tong  to  make  up  the  sub  assembly.    The  pin  end  of  the 
crossover  sub  was  set  into  the  bit  breaker  plate.    As  torque  was  applied  to  the  sub  assembly  with  the  top 
drive, the crossover sub pin released from the bit breaker plate allowing the drill string and tongs to strike the 
rig floor crewman pinning him against the “A” leg of the derrick.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  A snub line was not in place on the cross-over sub while making up the sub. 
•  The torque from the top drive caused the drill string to bow. 
•  Power to the top drive was not shut down quick enough. 
•  Using the top drive to make up the connection may have caused the torque to the drill string.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig crew personnel were instructed to use a snub line on crossover subs when making them up.   
•  Rig crew personnel were instructed to use a chain tong to make up the sub assembly.   
•  Rig  crew  personnel  were  instructed  to  not  torque  the  connections  of  the  BHA  until  the  entire  BHA, 

including the air hammer, is made up with chain tongs.  

•  Once all  BHA connections are made  up  and tightened  with chain tongs, lower the  BHA down the hole 

and torque each connection as appropriate.   

•  After setting the tong(s) and before applying final torque to connections, rig floor personnel should move 

to a safe location away from the BHA and tongs and behind a barrier.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  See the safety meeting topic “Making a Trip” in the IADC “5 Minute Safety Topic” book.  Also 
see IADC HSE Reference Guidelines Section 3.8.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2010 

