Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 

 
ALERT 00-29 
 
 
 

3RD Party Handling Tongs Results in Injury 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A third party employee attempted to take control from the drill crewmember by grabbing hold of the tong.  
The third party employee placed his hand in a pinch point on the tong.  When the tong jaw moved, his finger 
was caught in between the tong body and jaw.  The individual lost the end of his finger. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The third party employee was reported to have been trying to hurry up the crews when he was injured.  
Trying to work too fast usually will get someone hurt.  It also encourages other to try and work faster, which 
can get them hurt.  The driller did not stop operations when the third party attempted to operate the 
contractor’s equipment. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: 
 

•  Third party personnel should not be allowed to operate Drilling Contractor’s equipment.  

• 

Contractor’s rig floor supervisor should stop operations and not allow third party personnel to 
operate Drilling Contractor’s equipment.  Reasons for this are as follows: 
It is difficult to determine the third party employee’s experience level with regard to the 
equipment.  Many people used to operate this type of equipment, but no longer are familiar 
with it or are no longer physically able to operate the equipment. 

•  Contractors may not be aware of the amount of safety training received by the third party 

• 

employees. 
If a third party employee attempts to take control of contractor equipment, rig personnel 
should stop the operation and explain the policy to the individual or individuals involved. 
•  The Drilling Contractor’s “on-site” management may need to become involved in order to 

•  Pre-job safety meetings also ensure that third party personnel understand the contractor’s 

resolve the issue. 

position on working safely. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2000 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2000 

