 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alert 6-17      Offshore Crane Operator Falls through Dislodged Grating 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The deck crew was preparing to move two gas racks from the well test area.  While moving the gas 
racks the crane block started swinging in an uncontrolled manner.  The Crane Operator, in an attempt 
to regain control, boomed up causing the crane to reach the boom upper limit.  However, the continual 
swinging of the block resulted in it hitting the upper crane pedestal walk-around grating several times.   
 
Once the upper limit was reset by the Electronic Technician, the Crane Operator was able to park the 
crane in the boom rest and exit the crane cabin to start inspecting the upper crane walkway for 
damage. During the inspection, the Crane Operator stepped onto a piece of grating causing it to flip up 
and fall 58 feet (17.6 meters) to the main deck below. As the grating flipped up the Crane Operator 
managed to grab part of the upper walkway structure and fell 15 feet (4.5 meters) to a staircase below 
resulting in a fracture of his left leg. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 

  Crane block swung in an uncontrolled manner and hit the walk-around grating, damaging the 

fastening devices of the grating. 

  Crane Operator did not identify hazard and walked onto unsecured grating. 
  The current grating design has the front and rear kick plates secured directly on the grating itself 

and not the walkway frame, negating the possibility of using the kick plates as a retention 
mechanism for the grating.     

  The potential fall exposure was not identified by the Crane Operator.    

LESSONS LEARNED: 
 
The company has issued internal communications to share the lessons learned from this incident: 

  Discuss environmental conditions including vessel motion for all lifting activities during the Job 

Safety Analysis 

  Report all incidents immediately to supervisor 

  Ensure the incident scene is made safe before any inspection or investigation 

The company conducted a hazard hunt on all rigs to locate similar walkway designs where the kick 
plates are not welded to or an integral part of the walkway frame and support structure. 

The company engineering group in collaboration with the manufacturer will review the adequacy of the 
grating design, and implement any improvement fleet wide. 

The company will review its crane operators’ competency and training programs to better manage 
unusual situations when the block starts swinging. 

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

 

 

 

1. Lattice boom crane 

2.  Grating Location 

 

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

 

Kick plates welded on the grating rather 

than the walkway frames. 

3. Grating kick plates 

 

A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or    

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

