Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

HANDLING PENDANT WIRE RESULTED IN CUT HAND 

 
 
ALERT 06 – 17 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

A Supply Vessel was discharging cargo alongside a MODU.  The main block was being used in conjunction 
with a heavy lift pendant line. During the operation the Deckhand, in his normal course of operation, handled 
the pendant line to disconnect / attach the hook. In carrying out this activity he sustained deep cuts to his left 
hand and thumb. The vessel ceased operations and returned to harbor to get the IP to hospital.  Following 
medical treatment the IP was discharged from hospital but will be unfit for work for an extended period.  This 
has been classified as a Days Away From Work Case (DAFWC).  

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
The  crane  wire  termination  is  a  standard  aluminum  ferrule  which  is  widely  used  in  the  industry.  
Investigations revealed that there were a number of wires protruding from the top of the heavy lift pendant 
ferrule.  The wire tail has to be present to ensure full wire penetration and although they can be trimmed it is 
very difficult and carries a high risk of cutting the standing part of the wire.  
 
The IP was wearing standard PVC gloves with elastic cuffs which keep the hands dry, warm and allows full 
mobility but it has the lowest rating for protection against tearing and puncture.  Gloves are given ratings for 
various hazards e.g. Abrasion, Blade Cut, Tear and Puncture. 
 
From evidence it is clear that the IP’s hand came into contact with the wires that were protruding the ferrule.  
Despite the IP wearing gloves, they were not of a satisfactory rating for the job; the wires were sharp enough 
to penetrate his glove and cause the deep cuts.  

The condition of the wires protruding the ferrule created a clear hazard to personnel.  Following discussions 
with operators it has been noted this condition is common. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
It is recommended that all operators inspect their lifting equipment for similar type of deficiencies. 

In the long term these types of terminations require to be re-assessed, consideration should be given to 
terminations that do not create such hazards.  

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

 

 
 

• 

•  A recommended solution is to utilize crane pendants for 

offloading / back loading supply vessels which are fitted with a 
Flemish or ‘Super Loop’ type of termination (pictured).  The 
sleeve has a tapered top which encompasses the wire ends.  

It is suggested that they would only be required on crane 
pendants and not normal wire slings. It is further recommended 
that Companies ensure that operatives wear the most suitable 
glove for the task. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2006 

