Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 35 
 

PERSONNEL HOISTING INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Senior Toolpusher (STP) instructed the Driller to prepare the wire line for the next survey.  The Driller 
delegated the task to the Assistant Driller who in turn assigned a Floorman to don the man-riding belt and be 
hoisted to near the Monkey Board, then go outside the mast on the drawworks side, and be lowered back 
down to floor to pick up the wire line.  The wire line was attached to the riding belt and he was being hoisted 
again, towards the monkey board where he was to install the wire in its sheaves (30 meter height) (99 feet).  
As the individual was being hoisted, the buckle/strap of the riding belt caught a mast beam and the riding belt 
was pulled against two opposing forces and was sheared.  The Floorman fell from a height of 15 meters, (50 
feet) struck against the drawworks and landed on the rig floor where he died instantly. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Defective/Incorrect  PPE:  
The  riding  belt  used  was 
defective. The D rings were 
hanging  by  the  fabric,  and 
not the metal socket inside. 

Correct  PPE:    The  riding 
belt  did  not  meet 
the 
company’s 
man-riding 
requirements, as only a full 
body  man-riding 
safety 
harness is to be used.  The 
requirement  was 
issued 
three  years  earlier  and 
communicated  to  the  rigs, 
but  it  was  not  followed  on 
this rig. 

 

 

• 

• 

Job  was  poorly  planned; poor  personnel  assignment,  noncompliance  with  Safety  Management  System 
(work permit, Safe Job Assessment and pre-man-riding check list). 
Job  hazards  were  not  identified  and  not  communicated  to  the  crew.    Selection  of  crew  member  to 
perform the job was random.  The Driller advised he did not work with that crew before and did not know 
whom to select for the job. 

•  The Driller acknowledged that operation should have been stopped to perform man-riding but he did not 

think he was authorized to do so, unless told by the STP. 

•  STP considered the job to be routine and in his own judgment, it was not required to stop the work to 
perform man-riding.  Although he knew that procedure dictated that all operations to be stopped when 
performing man-riding. 

•  General safety culture on the rig suggested lack of safety awareness and no empowerment to stop the 

work. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig Supervisors were instructed to remove all non standard man-ridding belts from all rigs and replace 

with proper man-riding full body safety harnesses immediately. 

•  Man-riding  awareness  sessions  are  to  be  conducted  at  the  company’s  Training  Centre  and  include  all 

company STP’s. 

•  Warehouse Supervisors are to audit company warehouses to ensure that only approved full body safety 
harnesses  are  being  used/distributed.    All  other  non-standard/non-approved  equipment  to  be  removed 
(use/distribution). 

•  Personnel are to practice “Beyond Safety” techniques, where personal safety is a core value and should 

• 

STOP the job if in doubt. 
Incident  to  be  discussed  in  all  safety  meetings  and  all  forthcoming  “Beyond  Safety”  sessions  (Safety 
Culture) with company personnel.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  Rigs will be required to dedicate a safety stand down to discuss this incident and confirm the discussion 

to company office. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2007 

