Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 20 
 

LABELING CHEMICALS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A crew on a rig used a solvent to prepare the doghouse floor for painting.  They applied the solvent by filling 
a one liter drinking water bottle and punching a hole in its cap.  The bottle was left in the doghouse when the 
crew went off tour.  A floorman on the relieving crew was thirsty and drank out of the water bottle containing 
the clear solvent, ingesting a small amount of the cleaning fluid.  He was transported to the clinic immediately 
for medical treatment and following first aid and observation he returned to work.  

 
A similar incident occurred on another rig several years ago, when alcohol, used to melt ice, was placed in a 
water  container.    The  alcohol  was  being  used  to  remove  frost  and  keep  a  sheave  turning  in  the  subzero 
temperatures.  Like our more recent incident, a chemical was put into a drinking water bottle and not properly 
labeled to prevent others from misusing the chemical.  Another incident involved a rig crewman trying to cool 
himself off with what he thought was a gallon of water, turned out to be a gallon of gasoline! 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The most obvious solution to prevent ingestion and misuse of chemicals is to label all containers prominently 
and  accurately.    The  manufacturer  at  the  point  of  production and  distribution  typically  applies  labels  to the 
original container.  These labels identify the chemical, give appropriate warnings, identify the manufacturer, 
and  Material  Safety  Data  Sheets  should  accompany  the  products.    The  problem  though,  is  chemicals 
transferred  from  one  container  to  another,  usually  from  a  bulk  container  to  a  smaller  one,  and  then  no 
labeling being done.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Instructed rig supervisory personnel that:   

•  Proper labeling is a simple example of communicating hazards to other personnel.   
•  Labels should identify the contents and include the hazard.   
•  The  company  HSE  Department  recommends  that  each  division  order  the  proper  container  warning 

labels to address this problem.    

Rig  supervisors  are  to  include  the  labeling  system  in  your  Hazard  Communication  training  and  review  in 
safety meetings.  We already know the outcome when containers aren’t properly labeled, and by following 
labeling best practices, we will prevent this kind of workplace hazard from happening again.   

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2007 

