Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 21 
 

USE OF UNSAFE HAMMER RESULTS IN RWC 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An employee was attempting to open the valve caps on a mud pump using a valve cap removing tool and a 
hammer.    A  sliver  of  metal  broke  off  the  hammer  head  and  lodged  deep  in  his  left  forearm.    The  injured 
employee received five stitches to his forearm. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The injured employee struck the valve cap removing tool with a mushroomed hammer head, thereby causing 
a  metal  chip  to  break  off  the  hammer  head.    The  metal  sliver  went  through  the  employee’s  long  sleeve 
coverall and lodged deep in the IP’s left forearm. 
 

 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The operation was stopped and a safety meeting held to discuss the incident outcome. 
•  Rig  personnel  conducted  visual  checks  on  all  sledge  hammers  at  all  locations.    Hammers  with  dents, 
cracks,  chips,  mushrooming,  or  excessive  wear  were  taken  out  of  service.  Any  damaged  tools  were 
removed from service and repairs made. 

•  The rig crews were reminded to strike a hammer blow squarely and to avoid glancing blows or over and 

under strikes, whenever possible.   

•  Crew personnel were instructed to inspect to make sure that the striking hammer’s face and the striking 
face  of  the  tool  are  free  of  oil.    The  hammer’s  striking  face  should  be  parallel  with  the  surface  being 
struck. 

•  The rig crews were trained on selecting the proper type, size, and weight of hammer for the job. 
•  The rig crews were instructed not to strike a harder surface with a hard surface hammer. 
•  The rig crews were made aware of the danger associated with striking another hammer with a hammer.  
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2010 

