Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DERRICK OPERATION RESULTS IN A FATAL INCIDENT 

 
ALERT 08 – 24 
 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

The operation was pulling out of the hole and racking back drill pipe.  After the slips had been set, and before 
spinning out the pipe, the iron-roughneck operator looked up at the monkey-board, and did not see either the 
IP or the tugger chain attached to the stand of pipe.  He commenced to break the connection and back-out 
the stand.  While the exact sequence of events is not clear, during this process the IP’s left hand became 
trapped  between  the  pull-back  chain  and  the  pipe.    The  pipe  rotation  was  stopped  with  the  IP’s  left  hand 
facing the monkey-board, palm out.  

The IP was rescued from the monkey-board and given on-board medical attention.  The IP was then sent to 
the hospital ashore via medivac, and subsequently passed away at the hospital.  
 

 

 

Demonstrating placing the chain on the stand of pipe. 

Demonstrating the position of the injured hand 

 

incident.  

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The IP had not completed the “Derrickman On-The-Job Training”.  
2.  No direct communication had taken place between the Driller and the IP immediately prior to the 

It was a common practice to place the chain on the tubular prior to it being backed out.  

3.  The tugger chain used was 5.5-ft (168-cm) in length.  
4. 
5.  Neither the crew nor the rig had a “Rescue from Heights” plan as part of their Job Risk Assessment.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:  
 
Instructed the Rig Manager and OIM to ensure to verify:  
 
1.  All personnel working as a Derrickman (or relieving a Derrickman), should have successfully completed 

the Derrickman On-The-Job Training program.  

2.  All personnel manually racking tubulars (Derrickmen), have been instructed to NEVER place their pull 

back ropes or air tugger chains on a tubular while it is spinning, or prior to it rotating.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
3.  The Driller is responsible for communicating to the Derrickman (via the hands-free communication 

system), that it is clear for the Derrickman to place the rope or chain on the tubular – when it has been 
confirmed that rotation has been stopped, the iron roughneck or spinning wrench has been removed 
from the pipe, and the pin is lifted clear of the box.  

4.  Length of a chain used for manually racking tubulars should be formally risk assessed, to ensure that it 

does not create a potential hazard (either too long or too short).  

5.  All Job Risk Assessments involving manually racking tubulars are reviewed to include the previous 

6.  Ensure that the hands-free communication systems are in good working order, as per the company’s 

points.  

Health and Safety Manual.  

7.  A plan for the rescue of personnel at elevated levels is included in the relevant Job Risk Assessment and 

all necessary equipment is available [References: Company Health and Safety Manual section on Fall 
Protection].  

 

Rig  Specific  Corrective  Action  Plans  are  to  be  developed,  tracked,  and  closed  in  the  company’s 
incident closure tracking system.   

Regional  and  Rig  QHSE  Managers  are  to  follow  up  and  report  to  the  Director  of  Corporate  QHSE 
upon completion and close out.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2008 

