Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 23 
 

FORKLIFT INCIDENT – BROKEN LEG 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A Forklift was being used to move drill collars and realign them all with the pin/box in same direction.  When 
the forklift was moving in reverse to re-position  the collars back on the wooden planks, the drill collars slowly 
rolled forward on the forks.  The injured person put his right foot on the front drill collar to stop them rolling 
forward and falling off the forks.  As he gave a signal for the forklift driver to tilt the forks back (Fig.1), his foot 
slid off the collar. The collar then fell from the forks and fell on his right leg (Fig.2) causing a fracture.   The 
injured person will be off work for 3 to 6 months. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The drill collars were stored on wooden planks on the ground rather than on pipe racks.  
IP stood in front of the forklift and used his foot to stop the drill collars from rolling off 
• 
the forks. . 

•  The forklift operator operated the forklift without a clear view of the injured person who 

was the signalman (banksman). 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the 
following: 
 
•  Never use your foot to stop heavy moving objects. 
•  Never stand in front of any load.  
•  Store Drill Collars on pipe racks or correctly sized planks on the ground.  
•  Always stand where the forklift or crane operator can see you. 
•  Conduct proper risk assessment for non-routine forklift operations.   
•  Ensure a procedure is in place for forklift/drill collar operations. 
•  Stop the job when you feel it’s unsafe or if you see someone doing something unsafe.   
 

Fig. 1: Injured person giving signals while trying to keep 
collars from rolling off forks.    

Fig.2: Collars roll off onto injured person’s leg breaking it.  

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2006 

