Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 17 
 

NEAR MISS—NEW FALL PROTECTION EQUIPMENT FAILURE 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  derrickman  was  working  in  the  derrick  and  was  using  a  NEW  “Pass  through  Tie-Off  Adapter”  for  his  fall 
protection  anchor  point.    The  tie-off  adapter  in  this  case  was  a  3”  web  sling,  2  feet  long.    The  adapter  is 
wrapped  around  a  beam  or  other  secure  tie-off  point  and  one  end  passes  through  the  other  “choking”  the 
anchor point.  The lanyard is then attached to a full body harness d-ring.   

The derrickman had tied-off and then leaned out to perform his work.  The tie-off adapter “broke”, however, 
the derrickman was able to catch hold of the pipe to keep from falling out of the derrick.  

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Inspection of the tie-off adapter revealed that the D-ring end of the sling had not been fully assembled.  The 
webbing material end had been folded around the D-ring and hot glued, but had not been stitched.  Follow-
up inspections revealed that four out of the five tie-off adapters the company had purchased were defective.   

 
Several opportunities were missed to catch this mistake:  

1)  The manufacturer failed to catch the defect during its quality control inspections;  
2)  The  supplier  receiving  the  slings  from  the  manufacturer  also  failed  to  inspect  them  before  selling 

3)  The receiving agent didn’t inspect upon receiving them;  
4)  The Safety Advisor distributed the defective slings to the rig without inspecting them;  
5)  The Rig Manager stored the slings in his office until needed and failed to inspect them before 

them;  

use;  

6)  The Derrickman, which  was the last chance to catch  the error, began  using the  fall protection 

7) 

equipment without first inspecting it. 
Inspections  did  not  happen  because  personnel  involved  accepted  that  new  equipment  was  in 
good condition without defects.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The company emphasized to all rig personnel that they must be the final check of all safety equipment.  The 
extra minute or two  you spend inspecting  equipment before using  it (new or used), may save  you or a co-
worker from serious harm.   

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2009 

