Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 07 
 

LOST CONTROL OF DRILL PIPE RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The operation was Pulling Out Of the Hole (POOH) with 5-1/2 inch drill pipe.  The Derrickman was pulling 
back the stands of drill pipe with the assistance of an air hoist with a chain and hook attached.  After setting 
down stand # 26 in the set back area, the Derrickman unlatched the elevators and the Driller retracted the 
link tilt.  The Derrickman then used the derrick mounted tugger (air winch) to pull the stand of drill pipe back 
towards the finger board, clear of the traveling block.  The Driller commenced lowering the traveling blocks 
and after approximately a ten foot descent, the Top Drive came into contact with the top of stand #26.  As the 
Top  Drive  impacted  the  stand  of  pipe,  energy  was  transferred  causing  the  pipe  to  bow  and  snap  back 
towards  the  Derrickman  who  was  positioned  on  the  monkey  board.    The  stand  struck  the  Derrickman 
knocking  him  backwards  causing  his  head  to  strike  a  derrick  beam.    Although  no  one  actually  saw  the 
incident take place, it appears that the Derrickman lost control of the pipe thereby allowing it to fall back in to 
the path of the descending top drive. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Root Cause:   
 
•  Derrickman lost control of the stand of pipe. 
•  View from Derrick camera was obstructed at a critical point of the operation. 
•  The Derrickman did not attend the Job Risk Assessment. 
•  No Procedure was in place to ensure that stands are secured in the finger board before the Top Drive is 

lowered. 

 
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 
 
•  Teamwork was insufficient to compensate for the obstructed view of the monkey board. 
•  Relied solely on the inadequately placed derrick camera to establish if it is clear to lower the Top Drive. 
•  The length of pull back chain and design of hook may have contributed. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
Each company should review their top-drive tripping operation procedures to address the potential causes of 
this incident listed above. 
 

•  Review JSA  
•  Review SWA (stop Work Authority) and decide on a signal that is understood by all, and when given 

•  Discuss communication methods and maintain constant communication between the derrick and rig 

•  Maintain line of sight with the Derrickman while on the Monkeyboard 

stops the work 

floor  

 
   
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2006 

