Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 18  
 

NEAR MISS - DRILL STRING PARTS WHEN BOP PIPE RAMS ARE LEFT CLOSED 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After conducting a routine Hydrogen Sulphide (H2S) drill and returning to drilling mode.  The Driller engaged 
the  drum  clutch  and  picked  up  the  drill  string  while  the  BOP  pipe  rams  were  still  in  closed  position.    As  a 
result the drill string parted at the slip area reaching its maximum tensile yield of the first joint that was being 
hoisted.    The  elevators  and  the  links  jumped  violently  when  the  pipe  parted  and  approximately  4  foot  of 
broken drill pipe dislodged from the elevators which were approximately 15-20 feet above the rotary table.  
Before landing on the drill floor the dislodged pipe brushed the right shoulder of a floor hand standing in the 
immediate area.  Two other floor hands were also working the rig floor at the time.  
 
This  incident  had  the  potential  to  result  in  severe  consequences  up  to  and  including  fatal.  Fortunately  the 
floor man suffered no significant injury and will be able to return to normal duties. 
 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Human Error – Driller did not open the pipe rams before returning to normal operations. 
•  Failure to follow procedures - Although it is company policy and warning signage i.e. BOP Open/Closed 

were available on the rig they were not used in this instance. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
•  Rig Managers are to ensure that the company designed warning signage which is designed to fit over 

the weight indicator is available and used whenever BOP’s Rams are closed.  See example below. 

•  Compliance with the above is to be reported to the respective Rig Superintendent. 
•  Onsite Safety Officer is to randomly check that warning signage is being used during BOP drills.  Non 

compliance is to be reported to the relevant Rig Superintendent. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2006 

