Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 31  
 

LIFEBOAT INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While lowering a lifeboat to the water, the engine was placed in forward gear.  After reaching the water, the 
lifeboat  was  released  from  the  davit  cables  and  the  throttle  was  immediately  applied.   Within  seconds  the 
lifeboat lost all thrust from the propeller and became adrift in the water.  A nearby workboat responded and 
the lifeboat was secured and the personnel taken onboard.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Examination  of  the  lifeboat  revealed  a  4-foot  piece  of  1/2"  rope  wrapped  around  the  propeller  shaft  and 
wedged between the hull and the propeller.  This caused the shaft to be pulled to the aft, shearing the key in 
the coupling at the transmission, resulting in the loss of power to the propeller.  It was determined that after a 
routine lowering of the survival craft earlier in the day, ropes were placed on the davit cables to help guide 
and steady the craft during retrieval, but had not been removed after securing the lifeboat. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed Rig Personnel and Maintenance Personnel to: 

Inspect all survival craft and davit cables, and remove any rope or other debris.  

 
1. 
 
2.  When ropes or lanyards are attached to survival craft and / or davit cables for testing purposes, they 

are to be immediately removed at the completion of the task. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2002 

