Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 07 
 

FALL ON PLASTIC BERM LINER RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Motorman was attempting to gain access to the diesel tank area by crossing a 12” tall berm and plastic 
liner.    The  employee  was  crossing  the  berm  onto  the  liner  when  he  slipped  and  fell  into  a  16”  deep 
production containment area.  His right leg struck a valve in the production containment hole and both bones 
in his right leg were broken.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  There was no dedicated walking surface across the pit liner.   
• 
•  Operator roustabouts had removed the grating from the top of the production piping enclosure the week 

It had been raining and liners are especially slick when wet (or frosted in cold weather locations).   

before and failed to replace it.   

•  Others who might have seen the open hole failed to replace the grating. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
General  Company  Statement:    This  injury  incident  resulted  from  the  simple  activity  of  walking,  as 
have many of our incidents in the past year.  It is important to review the walking surfaces, whether 
they are walkways, working surfaces or stairs on the rig or walking surfaces on the job-site.  More 
frequently  our  operations  are  using  plastic  liners  and  berms  around  potential  environmental 
exposures  such  as  fuel  tanks,  fuel  transfer  equipment  and  other  potential  sources  of  hydrocarbon 
spills such as engines, mobile equipment and hydraulic units.  

•  Rig  personnel  need  to  be  constantly  aware  that  walking  surfaces  should  be  evaluated  as  to  where 

walkways need to be installed including properly constructed stairs over berms.   

•  Rig personnel need to remember that actions by other personnel must be evaluated to ensure that what 

they do or what they leave is not hazardous to personnel.   

•  Supervisors must make sure that pre-job meetings are held and all hazards are addressed.   
•  Rig supervisors are to review rig site plastic liners and berms and ensure proper stairs and walkways are 

•  The  Hazard  Identification  and  Near  Miss  Program  should  help  to  identify  and  control  hazards  such  as 

constructed where people will be walking.   

open holes when the program is used properly.   

Actions:   

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2007 

