Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 17 
 

FAILURE TO USE FALL PROTECTION RESULTS IN HIGH POTENTIAL 

INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  scaffolding  foreman  was  working  on  the  skid  beam  along  with  another  scaffolder  to  remove  two  temporary  sea 
fastenings.  The work was originally planned as a job for the hook-up and commissioning contractor.  The scaffolders were 
on a call-out to build scaffolding to allow the contractor to carry out the job from a fixed platform.  After the Injured Person 
(IP) visited the site, he assessed that the scaffolders could do the job using harnesses instead of building scaffolding.  He 
agreed  this  change  with  the  construction  supervisor  but  there  was  no  follow-up  conversation  with  the  permit  authorities.  
The first job was carried out successfully.  At some stage prior to or during the second job, the IP did not secure his safety 
line.  During the second job, one of the bolts was tight and the IP asked for a second spanner.  During this operation one of 
the spanners slipped, the IP lost his balance and fell backwards through an opening and to the deck 13.5m below, hitting 
an inclined support beam on the way down.  The injured received a fractured pelvis.  The incident could have resulted in a 
fatality.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
There  was  noncompliance  with  the  company’s  requirements  for  working  at  heights  and  permit  to  work.    Four  other 
personnel observed the job but no one checked whether the IP had attached his safety line and no one stopped the job.  
There was insufficient control of work on the platform caused by lack of rigor in the structure, application and audit of the 
Permit to Work system.  Management of change: The installation of the platform alongside an existing facility involved a 
significant  ramp  up  in  activity.    Additional  mitigating  processes  were  put  in  place  to  mitigate  this  risk  but  these  were  not 
adequate.  Working at heights: IP did not attach his safety line when working above 2meters.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed personnel in the following: 
 
•  Compliance with working at heights and permit to work to be improved through systematic verification of the quality of 

work permits and knowledge of Company Directives. 

•  Safety  expectations  to  be  reinforced  for  all  personnel  involved  in  the  installation  of  platforms  with  focus  on  zero 

tolerance for non-compliance with safety rules and platform standards.   

•  Emphasize personal responsibility to stop work that is unsafe. 
•  Structure and operation of the Permit to Work system on the project to be improved to provide better control of work. 
• 
•  Key Messages: 

Job description to be developed for the Area Authority role on the platform. 

•  Rules must be followed  
•  Everyone has an obligation to stop work that is 

unsafe. 

•  Consult the permit authorities if a job changes, 

no matter how small the change. 

•  Never  underestimate  the  need  to  ensure  the 
controls  that  have  been  put  in  place  to  control 
work are actually working. 

Trajectory of IP 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued April 2004 

