Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 14  
 

RIG DOWN LIFTING OPERATION RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig had made a number of moves with tires without breaking down the rig.  The crews had not had to 
break  the  rig  down  for  a  conventional  move  for  some  time  and  the  crew  was  inexperienced  in  the 
conventional process of moving a rig.  On this move the rig needed to be broken down for a conventional 
move.    The  Driller  (deceased)  with  a  crew  of  two  Floormen  were  disconnecting  the  bridle  line  from  the 
traveling block.  To gain sufficient height to rest the traveling blocks, two pipe racks were brought in and the 
catwalk was lifted on top of them.  As that was not sufficient, the catwalk was lifted one meter by a crane.  
The work group lead by the Driller was standing on the catwalk to get the bridle line disconnected, and when 
they removed the first pin which secured the bridle line to the traveling block, the traveling block tilted to the 
right, which caused the catwalk to swing to the right side.  The Driller who was standing on the catwalk fell 
between  the  catwalk  and  the  traveling  block  and  was  caught  between  those  two  objects  and  died  few 
minutes  later.    One  crewman  sustained  bruises,  and  another  crewman  sustained  a  broken  and  dislocated 
right wrist. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  deceased  had  been  recently  promoted  to  a  Driller  and  was  working  with  a  relatively  new  crew.    The 
Driller had received all required training for the Driller position, but he failed to practice the training in real life 
situations.  The rig had been moving on wheels and  the knowledge of break down moves was not shared 
with the new driller or crew members.  Also, the break down rig move procedure was not documented in the 
Rig Management System.   
 
•  Driller and crew were over enthusiastic and wanted to out perform, thus pushed themselves beyond their 

competency. 

•  Crew members did not intervene or try to STOP the job where there were obvious hazards present at the 

work place.  The STOP-job culture was not inherent with the crew.  

•  The  proper  procedure  for  disconnecting  the  bridle  line  called  for  removing  the  dead  line  from  anchor 
before attempting to disconnect the bridle line thus giving more slack on the bridle line.  This procedure 
was never discussed with the crew performing the job and was not documented.   

•  The traveling block was not secured to the cat walk to prevent it from moving.  In addition, it was sitting 

on a pad eye making it even more unstable.   

•  The catwalk was not secured to the pipe racks to provide a stable work platform.   
•  To gain more height, one end of the catwalk was lifted by a crane making the catwalk more unstable.   
•  The crew was working on a very unstable catwalk and a free 7 ton load.   
•  The crew members positioned themselves in vulnerable positions. 
 
Although communications was not a direct cause of the incident, there was a problem with communications 
between the rig and emergency response.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Supervisors for the rig were provided with the proper procedures for disconnecting the drilling line and bridle 
line from the blocks.  They were to provide the procedure of disconnecting the drilling line and bridle line from 
the traveling blocks to all rig personnel.   
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
•  Prepare a Safe Job Assessment (SJA) and/or discuss for such jobs at the Pre-job Safety Meeting. 
•  A lifting plan is to be prepared for the task, and the operation should be recognized as non-routine. 
•  Procedure for disconnecting the bridle line is to be properly documented in the Rig Management System 

and be made available for all crews and discussed in the pre-job safety meeting(s). 

•  Rig  management  is  to  remove  the  pad  eye  on  the  side  of  the  traveling  block  as  it  does  not  have  any 
function and will not affect the performance of the traveling block onshore.  This shall provide stable and 
flat base for the traveling block to rest on. 

•  Operations  personnel  are  to  review  the  bridle  line  disconnecting  procedure  on  all  company  rigs  and 
ensure they are all covered with SJA’s.  All rigs  shall be required to send relevant SJA’s to operations 
Management for review and approval. 

•  Rigs operating outside mobile service coverage should request and keep a satellite phone for use in an 

emergency. 

•  All  rig  move  plans  should  include  contingency  planning  and  a  means  of  communications  established 

and/or maintained during the rig down/rig up operation. 
Initiate a Safety Values seminar with the participation of Management to reiterate the message. 

 

 

• 
 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2007 

