Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 48 
 

LOSS OF WELL CONTROL RESULTS IN RIG FIRE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A well being drilled in a zone previously under pressured and depleted took a kick and caught on fire.  The 
drilling crew was stopped to take a MWD survey when the driller noted an increase in his pit level along with 
an increase in background gas.  The driller called the company man on location and informed him, waited a 
minute more and called him again to point out the situation had gotten worse.  After receiving no orders during 
the  second  call,  he  went  to  the  drawworks  controls  and  started  to  pick  up  the  Kelly  and  close  in  the  well.  
During this procedure the well unloaded and exploded, catching the back of the Driller on fire as he raced to 
the  BOP  Remote.    The  Driller  with  the  help  of  another  employee  in  the  doghouse  rolled  on  the  floor  and 
extinguished the fire on his back.  He then exited the doghouse.  The Rig Manager attempted to gain control of 
the well but was unsuccessful.  The results were a burn to the back area of one employee and the total loss of 
a drilling rig.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Failure to take well control procedures soon enough. 
 
•  An unexpected over pressurized zone.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directive to rig 
personnel: 
 
All Rig Managers and Drillers are to be reminded that no matter what, if you think you are taking a kick 
you are to close the well in first!  Then inform the site supervisors of what you have done. 
 
The company also:  
 

•  Made up posters re-emphasizing company policy and posted on all rigs. 
•  Meetings were held throughout the company re-emphasizing company policy of “when in doubt close 

the well in, do not wait for orders”. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued December 2003 

