Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 21  
 

LACK OF COMMUNICATION / FAILURE TO STOP JOB  RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The rig crew was in the process of running casing.  They had reached a point where a marker joint needed to be picked up and placed 
into the pipe handling system so that it could be made up in the casing string.  The crew retrieved the forklift that had been rented for 
use on this location. They tilted the fork carriage forward so that the forks could be spread out.  As the forklift operator tilted the 600 
pound (272 kilogram) fork carriage forward, and because the hydraulic pins on the bottom were not attached to the carriage, the entire 
carriage  swung  free  and  was  suspended  only  by  the  hooks.    The  crew  attempted  to  hammer  the  pins  out,  not  realizing  they  were 
hydraulic.  Their intent was to pin the carriage correctly.  The night company man was observing the operation and, after a discussion 
with  the  employees,  it  was  agreed  that  the  lift  would  be  used  in  its  “as  is”  condition  to  place  the  marker  joint  into  the  pipe  handling 
system; and that the forklift would be corrected later.  One employee was positioned in front of the forks in order to slide it over while 
two other employees pushed on the bottom section of the fork and away from the carriage.  One employee stated to the employee, who 
was ultimately fatally injured, “Hey, you are in a bad spot” as he was standing directly underneath the carriage.  The employee replied, 
“This is only going to take a second.”  As they pushed on the bottom section of the fork, the fork carriage was pushed free of its hanging 
points  and  the  entire  fork  carriage  fell  off  of  the  lift.    As  the  fork  carriage  fell,  it  struck  the  employee  who  was  standing  directly 
underneath the carriage on the head, thereby knocking and pinning him to the ground.  He sustained fatal injuries. 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

 

The day company man had ordered a bucket to be used on the lift later to level the location.  When the bucket was delivered, the 
forks were removed and the bucket was picked up and set aside off location.  When the forks were picked back up, they appeared 
to  be  pinned  correctly;  however,  the  pins  on  the  bottom  of the  carriage  were  not  engaged  through  the  carriage  (they  were  only 
through the carriage holder). 

•  Untrained personnel were used to remove and reinstall the forks on the forklift unit. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

 

The company re-emphasized STOP JOB authority to all personnel.  Regardless of who is giving the direction, if the job is not safe, 
it will not be done until it is made safe. 
The company reminded all employees who are trained on forklifts that they are not permitted to remove the forks for any reason.  If 
the forklift is rented, the employee will politely tell the company man that this task requires permission from the Tool Pusher. 
The company notified the other rigs in their fleet of the event.  All personnel were instructed to never remove forks from the system. 
If the operator requires the forks removed and the forklift used for a different task, then they must call someone out who is trained 
to do so. 
The company will continue to train their personnel as forklift operators only. 
The company re-emphasized with all personnel that inspections at shift change or before the use of the forklift after shift change is 
mandatory. If the forklift is not in proper working condition, it shall be locked-out and tagged-out until it is fixed. 

• 

• 

• 
• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect 

the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

their own situations and practices Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2014 

