Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 23 
 

REPAIRING CENTRIFUGAL PUMP RESULTS IN A NEAR – MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  welder  was  in  the  process  of  removing  a  seized  threaded  impellor  from  the  2-1/2”  shaft  of  a  centrifugal 
mud pump.  To loosen the impeller from the shaft the welder used a welding torch to heat it.  The impeller is 
screwed  onto  the  shaft  with  right-hand  threads  and  the  threads  are  sealed  inside  the  back  of  the  impeller 
with an “O”-ring.  When the shaft/impeller was installed previously, the threads were greased and cavity was 
filled with grease.  As the impeller was being heated, the heat from the torch caused the grease to expand 
inside the impeller thread cavity.  The expanding grease caused the cast center of the impeller to explode 
outward (see photo), striking a nearby welding machine. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Grease  had  been  used  to  lubricate  threads  on  the  impeller,  which  later  expanded  from  the  heat  of  a 
welding torch.  Since there was no way to relieve the pressure an explosion resulted and the center of 
the impellor to become a missile.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig maintenance 
personnel in the following: 
 
  This incident highlights that many of us are unaware of the technical aspects of centrifugal pumps and 

their design.   

  Do not heat the impeller to remove it unless a relief hole is drilled! 
  This  incident  was  reported  to  the  manufacturer  and  they  are  sending  a  representative  to  discuss  the 

technical nature of the equipment.   

  Workers  are  to  Include  (review)  equipment  safety  bulletins  related  to  the  tasks  they  are  performing  in 

pre-job safety meetings and JSAs being discussed.   

Cavity which was 
filled with grease. 

Projectile from center of cast impeller. 

 

 
Recommended Corrective Action:  Drill a 1/8 hole 
in the center of this impeller cavity before attempting 
any removal using heat.  
Extreme Explosive Hazard! 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2010 

 

 

