Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 33  
 

HAND-HELD ANGLE GRINDER INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A rig welder was working on the rig floor modifying the rotary guard.  While dressing a weld with a hand-held 
angle  grinder,  the  grinding  wheel  shattered.    One  piece  of  the  grinder  wheel  struck  the  welder’s  left  leg  just 
below the knee causing a  2" cut requiring 6 stitches to close.  The  injury  has been classified as a restricted 
work case. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The hand-held angle grinder had been modified.  Modifications included: by passing the on/off switch and 
removing the deflector guard.  The deflector guard serves to direct flying debris away from the operator and in 
this case would have directed disc shards away.  Another contract welder was found to have another hand-
held angle grinder in his tool box with the same modifications.  This grinder was also removed from service.  
Grinding discs on site were checked and found to be rated above the RPM rating for the hand-held angle 
grinders on location.  This is important because if the grinding disc is rated at a lower RPM than the grinder, 
the disc could explode and throw pieces into the work area.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions to all 
personnel:   
 
•  Grinders and grinder discs can be ordered in a variety of rated RPMs, so be certain the disc matches or 

exceeds the rated RPM of the grinder.   

•  A  problem  associated  with  the  portable  hand  grinders  mobility  is  that  they  are  prone  to  being  dropped.  
Dropping  an  angle  grinder  could  crack  the  grinding  disc  resulting  in  it  flying  apart  while  being  used.  
Anytime  a  hand-held  angle  grinder  is  dropped,  inspect  the  disc  for  damage  and  perform  the  ring  test 
before using.  If there is any doubt about the integrity of the disc, replace it immediately.   

•  The Ring Test.  Take the disc in the one hand, holding it by the arbor or by placing a finger into the tapped 
plate  hole  and  tap  the  disc  with  the  wooden  handle  of  a  screwdriver.    Tap  at  a  45  degree  angle  from 
vertical, about 1-2" from the periphery of the disc.  A disc in good condition (without cracks) should give a 
clear, metallic ring when tapped, though the pitch will vary from discs of various grades and sizes.  

•  Breakage could also occur if the disc is taken from a cold room and pressure applied before it is allowed to 
warm  up.    Store  grinding  discs  in  a  dry,  warm  place  and  allow  the  grinder  to  run  for  a  minimum  of  one 
minute before starting any grinding.   

•  No modifications to grinders are allowed, without manufacturer’s approval.  

•  Proper eye protection is goggles or a face shield with goggles.  Safety glasses are inadequate protection 

(worn with or without a face shield) and a face shield is inadequate without goggles. 

 
IADC Note:  See Alerts 00 – 34 and 01 - 06 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2002 

