Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 44 
 

FORK LIFT TRUCK TIRE EXPLODES 

RESULTING IN A NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
One of  the  company’s  yard  forklifts had  a  flat  on  one  of  the  front  tires.    The  flat  consisted  of a  hole  in  the 
tread of the tire.  The flat tire was picked up and repaired by a local tire repair shop and put back onto the 
forklift  by  the  repair  shop  personnel.    Because  the  tire  was  repaired  the  Yard  Supervisor  had  the  tire 
swapped with one of the rear tires.  The forklift had been used several times and was sitting idle and all yard 
personnel had left the yard except for one welder.  He was preparing to leave at around 2:30 pm when he 
heard a loud pop.  He then noticed a cloud of dust around the forklift.  Inspection showed that the rear tire 
(the tire that had been repaired) had exploded.  The tire rupturing caused considerable damage to the forklift. 
(As seen in the photos)  The tire evidently blew upward separating the step from the mounting bracket and 
causing it to hit the cab.  It is very fortunate that no one was in or around the forklift at the time of this failure.  
Had some one been near and the tire blew out to the side the results could have been catastrophic. 
 

Picture 1 

Picture 2 

Picture 3 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
It is believed that over-inflation caused this incident.  When the tire was repaired and placed back onto the 
forklift by the repair shop personnel, the tire pressure was checked by yard personnel while the repairman 
was still tending to the forklift.  The tire was inflated to 70 psi.  Because the tire had just been repaired, the 
assumption  was  made  that  this  was  correct  and  the  other  tires  were  inflated  to  this  pressure  at  that  time.  
After the incident, the repair shop was called back to the yard.  At that time the repairman, who is the same 
person who installed the repaired tire, was asked about the amount of pressure that should be used?  He 
suggested  45  psi.    We  then  consulted  the  forklift  manufacturer  as  to  their  recommendations.    They 
recommended the front axle working load pressure at 47 psi and the rear axle load pressure at 21 psi. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The incident has been discussed with all yard and trucking personnel.  
•  All  tires  on  the  forklifts  have  been  checked  and  will  continuously  be  checked  to  ensure  that  they  are 

inflated to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2006 

