Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 21 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

CRANE MAINTENANCE RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 

The mechanic and electrician were moving the generator exciter outside of the crane cab.  They had one come-
along attached to the rear of the exciter and a chain fall attached to the front of the exciter.  While pulling the 
exciter  outside  the  door,  the  rear  chain  fall  was  above  in  the  trolley  guide.    As  the  exciter  was  being  pulled 
outside of the crane cab with the chain fall the lifting eye that the come-along was attached to, slipped out of the 
trolley  guide  rail.    The  come-along  fell  striking  the  employee  on  the  left  thumb  causing  a  fracture  and  the 
employee to loose time from work.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Improper rigging of equipment  
 
•  The JSA did not mention anchoring the chain fall to the trolley pad eye.  
•  The JSA did not mention checking the trolley rail for the end stop being in place. 
•  The crew did not stop the job when they had a change in planned procedures. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Issued Action Items to maintenance personnel: 
 
•  Revise the JSA to ensure they note where to attach chain falls and come-along and any other equipment 

needed for the job.  

•  Also to check the trolley assembly for end stops in place.  
•  Check all cranes to ensure they are equipped with the proper overhead trolley assembly and if they do not 
match the attached information from the crane manufacturer, the rig will order and replace with this I-Beam 
trolley system.  

o  The I-Beam installation consists of three (3) drilled sections; one is bent to fit the shape of the 

machinery house, stops, hardware and three (3) 2-Ton ball bearing trolleys.  This installation has 
much greater capacity, adequate for handling the M/G sets, motors, etc.  Contact the crane 
manufacturer and ask for the I Beam Trolley drawing. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2004 

