Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 03  
 

HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS/DROPPED LIFTING SUB 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
When the driller broke out the lifting sub used to help make up bottom hole assembly (BHA), he hoisted it up 
approximately 20’ to allow the insertion of the Measurement While Drilling (MWD) probe.  This activity took 
about  ten  minutes.    After  completion  the  driller,  forgetting  the  lifting  sub  was  still  suspended  by  elevators, 
lined them up on the next stand.  Since he had a restricted line of sight, he did not see the lift sub before 
opening  the  elevators  to  grab  the  next  stand.    This  resulted  in  the  sub  falling  20  plus  feet  to  the  rig  floor, 
causing a serious near miss and equipment damage. 

1). Pick up Sub that fell to Rig Floor (55 kgs) 

2). Damage to pick up sub 

3). Damage to MWD Hang Off 

4). Damage to MWD Hang Off 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Failure to follow plan by not laying the lift sub down before inserting probe. 
•  Not taking the time to ensure clear line of sight or establishing a signaler. 
•  Driller was not familiar with this particular operation. 
•  No formal JSA was conducted that included input and responsibility from 3RD party contractor. 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following to rig 
personnel: 
 
•  Always ensure a JSA is properly done when working with 3rd party personnel and/or equipment. This is 

the tour pusher’s responsibility. 

•  Never consider any task as routine.  Conditions always change. 
•  Always follow the basic rule of not suspending loads over workers. 
•  Utilize  the  STOP  by  calling  time  out  until  communications,  by  line  of  sight  or  with  assistance,  can  be 

established. 

 
USE THE STEP BACK 5X5 PROCESS BEFORE PERFORMING ANY STEP A TASK REQUIRES 
 
Photo showing lay out of incident scene. 

Driller 
 

Pipe in Derrick 

MWD Hand 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Floor Hand  

Pipe in Derrick 

Floor hand  

Position of chip in MWD Tool 

Final resting place of Sub 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2006 

