Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 33 

WORKER’S ARM CAUGHT IN MUD BUCKET 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The air slips were changed out because they were not setting properly.  In order to pull the slips away from 
the rotary table, the air line from the mud bucket was removed and fitted to the rig floor winch.  (The sole 
purpose of that particular air winch is for use with the air slips.)  When the crew removed the air hose from 
the  mud  bucket  and  connected  it  to  the  air  winch,  they  operated  the  control  valves  on  the  mud  bucket  to 
bleed  off  the  residual  pressure  in  the  air  line.    The  driller  was  setting  down  the  weight  of  the  drill  string, 
getting  ready  to  back  out  a  stand  of  drill  pipe  when  he  observed  a  rig  floor  worker  (Injured  Person  [IP]) 
holding a dope brush with his hand inside the mud bucket.  The driller shouted a warning and at the same 
time the mud bucket closed, trapping the man’s arm as the air supply to the bucket was turned back on.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The other crew members did not know that the IP was in the front of the mud bucket with his hand inside 

to dope the mud bucket seals.  

  The mud bucket closing speed is approximately 3 seconds. 
  The design of air hose arrangement was inadequate. 
  There was poor communication between the IP and the man reintroducing air supply to the mud bucket. 
 

Inadequate instruction had been given to the crew personnel on how to isolate and de-isolate the mud 
bucket 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The company conducted retraining with all rig crews on the safe use of the mud bucket. 
  Corrected the connection / disconnection of air supply to be highlighted with all crews. 
  Warning chevrons were painted on the front of mud bucket at the opening 
 
  Modified the controls of the mud bucket so that two valves have to be operated simultaneously in order 

Installed an independent air supply for the air winch. 

to close the mud bucket. 

 

 

Demonstration of IP Hand inside the Mud Bucket 

Mud Bucket Control 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2010 

