Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 09  
 

IMPROPERLY STORED HAND RAILS 

RESULTS IN LOST TIME INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A welder was attempting to measure a bundle of handrails that were stored on the roof of the choke manifold 
house.  One handrail was lodged above the others in the bundle and when the welder jostled the bundle, the 
lodged  handrail  shifted,  slipping  down.    The  toe  board  landed  on  top  of  the  welder’s  foot  breaking  a  bone 
resulting in a Lost Time Injury.    
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  handrails  sections  were  improperly  stored.    When  the  bundle  of  handrails  was  placed  on  the  roof,  one 
handrail was left in a position that it could fall if the bundle was jostled.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  When moving equipment or materials, consider what could happen.   
•  Learn  to  recognize  the  characteristics  of  stored  energy  and  learn  to  control  it  when  working  around 

•  When  approaching  a  job,  such  as  working  with  stacked  materials,  check  to  ensure  that  they  are  secure 

equipment and materials.  

before beginning the job. 

•  Use  the  STOP  techniques  you  learned  such  as  ABBI  (Look  Above,  Below,  Behind  and  Inside)  before 

starting.  This can alert you to the presence of an uncontrolled energy source such as gravity.   

•  When  you  are  involved  in  any  task,  first  take  the  time  to  consider  safety.    Two  minutes  could  make  the 

difference between completing a job safely and a broken foot.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2003 

