Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

TEST ASSEMBLY MAKEUP RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
ALERT 04 – 37 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 
The rig was pressure testing BOPs and surface equipment.  
The test assembly had been made up with a side entry sub 
and  lo-torque  valves.    On  the  3rd  test,  the  manual  lower 
IBOP  (inner  blow  out  preventer)  on  the  TDS  (top  drive 
system,  could  not  be  closed  due  to  the  position  of  the 
torque tube key slot.  At this time the TDS connection  was 
broken and backed out of the test string to align the torque 
tube key slot.  After the key  slot had been  aligned and the 
valve  closed  the  driller  proceeded  to  make  up  the  TDS 
connection.  Rig tongs were placed on the TIW valve above 
the  side  entry  sub  for  back  up.    While  applying  torque  the 
tong  bite  broke  and  allowed  the  test  assembly  to  rotate.  
The  deceased  was  struck  about  the  abdomen  and  upper 
body by the side outlet and lo-torque valve. (See picture at 
right). 

 
An  immediate  fleet-wide  procedural  change  prohibiting  the 
attachment of any pressure testing assembly to a side-entry 
sub  until  all  drill  string  connections  have  been  made  up  to 
their full make up torque shall be effective immediately.   
 
In  order  to  prevent  this  from  reoccurring,  a  job  risk 
assessment shall be developed and utilized on every rig for 
the  specific  procedure  to  be  followed  for  make  up  of  side 
entry  subs  that  will,  as  a  minimum:  1.  Prohibit  the 
attachment of any pressure testing assembly to the side of 
the  side  entry  sub  until  all  drill  string  connections  have 
been  made-up  to  their  full  make-up  torque.    2.  Ensure  all 
side  entry  subs  comply  with  the  requirements  of  internal 
engineering  standards.    3.  Ensure  that  a  review  of  all 
precautions  and  inspections  identified  in  the  company 
safety  manual  are  thoroughly  discussed  and  implemented.  
4.  Ensure  no  personnel  are  in  a  position  that  will  place 
them in the path of a potential load or energy source.   
 
All  OIMs  and  Rig  Managers  shall:  a)  Submit  the  job  risk 
assessment meeting the above requirements for review and 
approval by regional management within 7 days. 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  exact  cause  of  the  accident  and  corrective  measures  to  be  undertaken  are  still  under  investigation.    The  failure  to 
identify the hazard and assess the risk was a major factor in this fatality.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives: 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2004 

