Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 18 
 

FALL FROM CASING RESULTS IN LTA 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The deck crew was in the process of back-loading a 30 foot mud motor to a crew boat off the port side of the 
rig.  The deck coordinator had slung the mud motor with a sling at each end using the double wrap method of 
slinging.  After attaching the tag lines to the load, the deck coordinator moved to what he perceived to be a 
safe  area  (approximately  6  feet  (2  meters)  away)  on  the  light  end  of  the  load.    The  deck  coordinator  then 
signaled the crane operator to raise the load.  As was discussed in the pre-job talk the crane operator raised 
the load to height that the deck coordinator could determine that the load was stable (approximately 2 feet 
[.6t meter]).  At this time the deck coordinator approached the load on the light end and signaled the crane 
operator to raise the load for back-loading.  When the crane operator started his lift, the load shifted, causing 
it  to  rise  on  the  light  end  and  to  move  towards  the  deck  coordinator.    In  an  effort  to  get  away  from  the 
unexpected movement of the load the deck coordinator put himself on the side of the load that had no room 
for escape.  He was then forced to sit down on the other smaller tubulars also stored on top of the casing.  
The starboard aft movement of the load coupled with elevation of the light end of the mud motor caused the 
entrapment  of  the  deck  coordinator’s  left  leg.    Now  the  deck  coordinator  was  over  the  edge  of  the  racked 
casing and his leg was trapped between the suspended mud motor and the two mud motors on the racked 
casing.  The crane operator stopped the crane, and the load then moved forward releasing the trapped deck 
coordinator,  who  then  fell  approximately9½  feet  (2.85  meters)  from  the  top  of  10¾”  casing  stacked  on  the 
port pipe rack to the catwalk.  The injured person sustained fractures of his left leg and his right arm as a 
direct result of the fall and the entrapment of his leg. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The deck coordinator’s position in relation to the load when it shifted caused the entrapment and subsequent 
fall.  The crane block was centered prior to the lift and appropriate slinging techniques were employed for the 
lift.  The heavy end of the load was not free during the initial lift to see if the load was stable.  The most likely 
reason  for  the  load  transition  is  the  shifting  of  the  balanced  load  from  the  heavy  end  to  the  light  end  as  it 
came to equilibrium.    
 
When the casing was initially loaded aboard the rig it was determined that it would be there for an extended 
period.  There was no mitigation of the risks associated with landing and lifting loads from that height.  The 
pre-job planning used a JSA that did not make mention of the height to which the deck coordinator would be 
rigging the loads.  The crane operator made mention of the edge and the height during the pre-job planning; 
however no controls were put in place. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  The person in charge of the load is responsible to check that both ends are free. 
•  When  loading  or  unloading  items  from  racked  tubulars,  all  lifts  will  be  checked  for  stability  and  correct 

rigging.  

•  Personnel shall move off the racked tubular prior to making the lift. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2008 

