Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 24  
 

TRIPPING OPERATION RESULTS IN A  

HIGH-POTENTIAL NEAR MISS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After the derrick man unlatched the elevators to rack back a stand of drill pipe, the driller started to lower the 
top  drive  system  down  before  ensuring  that  the  drill  pipe  had  cleared  the  top  drive.    The  back-up  wrench 
caught  the  edge  of  the  box  of  the  top  joint  of  drill  pipe,  causing  the  drill  pipe  to  slightly  bow  and  spring 
forward.    It  was  determined  that  one  of  the  elevator  link  tilt  adjustments  on  the  top  drive  had  slipped  to  a 
position which made it difficult for the derrickman to open the elevators as the arms did not move past the 
back-up wrench under normal operations. No injury or damage resulted. 
 

Lowering the top drive system before ensuring the drill pipe was clear of the top drive. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
• 
•  Communications between personnel was disrupted due to loss of visual contact. 
•  Training was not adequate with the crew. 
•  Preventative maintenance was not sufficient. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The operation was stopped and a safety meeting was held with the drilling crew. 
•  Visual contact, communication and regular maintenance checks were stressed in the safety meeting. 
•  The  elevator links  were adjusted  to  the proper position  and  painted  above  and  below  the clamps  as a 

visual reference to ensure proper adjustment. 

•  A  Job  Safety  Analysis  related  to  the  activity  must  be  reviewed  by  all  crew  members  involved  in  the 

activity prior to any job taking place. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2009 

