Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 11 
 

NEAR MISS – EQUIPMENT FAILURE AT 14,000 PSI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  a  pressure  test  on  the  choke  and  kill  line  of  a  subsea  stack,  an  incident  occurred  that  resulted  in 
property damage. When the test pressure reached 14,000 psi, the internal threads within the Kick Out Stab-
lock ring stripped and failed to hold.  Once the lock ring threads failed, the force was transferred to four ¾” 
studs located on the underside of the threaded locking ring. The ¾” studs failed and the high pressure hose 
was  blown  off  the  test  cap.    The  design  test  pressure  of  the  threaded  lock  ring  was  22,000  psi.    Risk 
assessment  was  performed  and  implemented  risk  mitigation  required  the  hazard  area  to  be 
barricaded prior to the test. 
 

 

 

 

Note:  Stripped Threads on locking ring. 

Note:  Fitted ring is shallower than OEM ring.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
It  was  determined  the  immediate  cause  was  due  to  the  failure  (stripping)  of  the  alignment  locking  ring 
threads  and  when  the  threads  failed,  force  was  transferred  to  the  four  retaining  studs  which  subsequently 
failed. 
Root Cause:  The threaded lock ring did not meet the specifications of the Original Equipment Manufacturer 
(OEM), and the size of the non-OEM lock ring was different from the OEM adapter ring.  Investigation also 
determined  the  threaded  locking  ring  and  the  studs  that  failed  were  not  being  periodically  inspected  or 
addressed within planned maintenance. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Directed  rig  personnel  that  only  OEM  parts  will  be  used  for  high  pressure  and  critical  well  control 
applications.    Annual  Magnetic  Particle  Inspection  (MPI)  has  been  scheduled  for  the  locking  rings  in 
preventative maintenance system inspection. 

 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
Summary:    This  type  of  high  pressure  incident  had  the  potential  to  cause  severe  injury  or  death  and 
because of proper risk assessment the result of this failure was equipment damage only. The lesson learned 
is  that  only  OEM  parts  should  be  used  when  replacing  or  maintaining  critical  well  control  components.  
Machine  thread  tolerance  and  design  specifications  of  non-OEM  parts  incorporated  into  our  well  control 
system can expose us to potential injury, equipment damage and downtime. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2006 

