Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 46 
 

USE OF IMPROPER CUTTING TOOLS RESULT IN INJURIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An employee was attempting to cut an opening through the lid of a plastic five-gallon bucket of chemicals.  
He was holding the knife in his left hand while holding the bucket with the other hand.  The employee also 
used his feet to stabilize the bottom of the bucket.  While cutting the opening, the employee’s knife slipped 
out  of  the  hole  that  was  being  cut.    The  knife  entered  the  employee’s  right  palm  just  below  the  thumb 
resulting in a laceration that required 10 sutures to close.  In the last two months there have had two identical 
injuries  involving  knives  and  within  the  last  six  years,  the  company  has  experienced  34  total  incidents 
involving knife injuries.  Many of the injuries resulted in recordable incidents.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Improper cutting tool was used for the job.  In addition improper procedure was used for opening bucket lids. 
The JSA on “opening buckets” did not cover the use of a knife. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  THE USE OF ANY AND ALL KNIVES WILL STOP IMMEDIATELY. 
•  Use alternate cutting devices in place of knives. 
•  Follow the STOP program and other safety guidelines when selecting the proper tool for a job. 
•  Follow written procedures when opening the lid of a bucket. 
•  Review and revise JSA’s to correspond with the job at hand. 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to Safety Alert 01-05.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2005 

