Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 22  
 

DROPPED OBJECT:  FAST LINE GUIDE ROLLER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The day crew was tripping in DP to 11,000 ft.  The trip was stopped to visually inspect the fast line stabilizer 
guide which had been repaired the previous day.  They observed it for 4 stands and found it to be OK. Later 
during  the  trip  a  loud  noise  was  heard  above  the  crew.    The  trip  was  stopped  and  crewmen  searched  for 
cause of the noise.  It was discovered that the bottom outside roller of the line guide, weighing 6.5 lbs, had 
fallen from the stabilizer assembly onto the roof.  It bounced to an unmanned deck and into a cargo basket.  
Both sides of the roller had visible wear.  One side of the bolt thread was worn down and half of the other 
bolt was worn down due to roller movement after the lock nut had backed off.  There were no injuries.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  locknut  on  the  bottom  outside  roller  had  backed  out  allowing  the  roller  to  fall  out.    The  stabilizer 
assembly  had  recently  been  rebuilt.    Investigation  revealed  that  some  of  the  lock  nuts  had  been  loosened 
and re-tightened.  All six rollers are seldom changed out at the same time, but it is necessary to loosen all 
lock nuts in order to re-install the assembly on the fast line.  When a locknut is loosened and re-tightened, its 
break-out  torque  is  reduced  (and  continues  to  be  reduced  further  each  time  the  nut  is  loosened  and  re-
tightened.)  To prevent this reduction in breakout torque, the lock nut must be replaced with a new one from 
the manufacturer and the old one discarded. 
 

Fast Line Stabilizer Guide 
with 6 rollers.  

Lock nuts to be torqued only 
once.   Replace lock nuts if 
broken out.  

 

   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company gave rig personnel the following 
instructions: 
 
Since the fast line stabilizer guide assembly is overhead and undergoes continuous rigorous vibration, it has 
high dropped-object potential. Therefore, it is mandatory that each lock nut be used only once.    
 
When removing the stabilizer guide for service or to change one or more rollers:  
 
1.  All self-locking nuts on all rollers are to be replaced.  Do not re-tighten a lock nut once it has been 

loosened.  Discard all used lock nuts.   

2.  Do not torque up the nuts fully until the stabilizer assembly guide is squared on the fast line. 
3.  Ensure the assembly is inspected regularly (as well as subjected to Preventive Maintenance protocols).  
4.  Have a JSA for rebuilding, servicing or replacing one or more rollers in which the above points are 

specified.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2007 

