Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 28   
 

WINCH DRUM LINE SLACK RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While rigging down, the derrick (mast) had been removed from the rig floor and placed on the pipe racks.  A 
gin truck winch line was attached to the back A-leg to support its weight while the pins were removed from the 
support brace so that it could be lowered for transportation.  As the driller reached in to remove the top pin, a 
small  amount  of  trapped  slack  on  the  winch  drum  was  released  and  allowed  the  A-leg  to  unexpectedly  shift 
position.  The driller’s right little finger was caught between the support brace and A-leg, resulting in a mashed 
finger which became an LTI. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Failure to straighten ( tightly wind) the line on the truck’s winch drum prior to suspending the load allowed an 
uncontrolled movement of the A-leg during this operation. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 

•  A full investigation of the accident was conducted and documented by the drilling superintendent and 
management.    Discussions  and  operational  reviews  with  supervisors  and  involved  parties  identified 
risks  and  procedures  to  avoid  a  repeat  of  the  incident.    This  documentation  was  shared  with  all 
company rigs and personnel immediately. 

 
•  A JSA was prepared for the mandatory straightening of winch lines so that no slack is present on the 

drum during the handling of loads. 

 
•  Gin poles are to be carefully centered above all loads prior to lifting to minimize the potential for lateral 

load movement during handling. 

 
•  A  JSA  was  prepared  for  proper  body  position  and  hand  placement  during  removal  of  pins  while 
handling of suspended loads to ensure that the load is stable prior to pin removal and that the body 
and hands are clear of potential injury. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2002 

