AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/11 

  September 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Oxygen Regulator Explodes Causing Injury 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  oxygen  regulator  exploded  when  the  oxygen  was  turned  on,  causing  a 
second degree burn injury to someone’s hand. The incident occurred during  the changeover of high pressure (HP) oxygen 
diving  gas  quads.  The  gasman  was  tasked  with  going  on  deck  to  change  over  a  supply  of  oxygen  from  one  gas  quad  to 
another.  Company  procedures  for  isolating  the  oxygen  quad,  venting  the  line,  disconnection  of  the  regulator  and  then 
reconnection onto the new quad were all carried out correctly. Once the regulator was reconnected onto the new gas quad 
the gasman turned on all 16 individual bottle valves. He then ensured the oxygen regulator was fully wound back and then 
proceeded to open the King Valve to allow the oxygen to flow into the regulator. It was during this process of turning the 
King Valve and releasing oxygen at 200 bar into the regulator that the explosion took place. 

After  the explosion it was not possible to isolate the escaping oxygen from the King  Valve due to possible damage to the 
valve seat. Each of the 16 individual cylinders then had to be turned off to isolate the flow of oxygen.   

        Oxygen gauge 

Gas quad and King Valve 

Burn injury to hand 

 

 

 

Following investigation, the following points were noted: 

  Unsuitable personal protective equipment (PPE) was worn for the task. A glove which would restrict heat exchange to 

the skin would have been more suitable, and consideration should be given to the use of a full face mask; 

  Possibility that there may have been some debris or substance such as grease or oil left in the King Valve by the supplier 

prior to delivery to the vessel; 

  The practice of opening all 16 cylinders at once proved to be hazardous in isolating the flow of escaping oxygen. 

The following actions were put in place: 

  Ensure all connection points are free from grease, oil and dirt prior to connecting any regulators or hoses; 

  Ensure oxygen storage areas are sited such that they will not be contaminated with oil or grease, for example beneath an 

ROV platform; 

  Conduct checks of all in use and serviceable regulators used for transfer of oxygen, including those not connected with 

diving, for example deck welding/burning operations; 

  The risk assessment for the connection and disconnection of gas quads and equipment should be suitable and sufficient, 

and should be understood by all; 

 

  The following revised procedure was developed for connecting to an oxygen quad: 

remove suppliers’ dust cap 
crack King Valve to confirm there is no pressure behind the valve 

– 
– 
–  open King Valve and install regulator for gauging and analyses 
– 
– 
– 

confirm regulator is backed off 
the first cylinder is to be opened with the technician standing to the side or rear of the quad 
allow pressure to equalize slowly in the manifold and proceed to open remainder of cylinders. 

2  Lifeboat Drill – Near Casualty  

An  incident  has  been  brought  to  IMCA’s  attention  in  which  a  lifeboat  was  accidently  dropped  into  the  sea.  The  incident 
occurred during a lifeboat drill at sea in good weather conditions. The starboard lifeboat was lowered to the embarkation 
deck. In this operation the top link of the forward chain for the connection between the davit floating block and the hook on 
the lifeboat parted, such that the entire load of the lifeboat was transferred to the aft hook/chain. As the aft chain could  not 
withstand  this  weight,  it  parted  and  the  lifeboat  was  dropped  into  the  sea.  At  the  time  of  the  incident  no  crew  members 
were onboard the lifeboat and thus there were no injuries. However, the lifeboat itself was considered a total loss due to 
extensive damage caused by the fall.  

As lifeboats are often the primary method of evacuation from  many vessels, the importance of maintaining the lifeboats to 
the  highest  standard  cannot  be  over-emphasised.  This  safety  flash  highlights  the  importance  of  thorough  inspection  and 
maintenance of lifeboats and their associated launching equipment. 

Sequence of images illustrating the equipment failure 

 

 

 

 

Following investigation, the following probable cause of the incident was identified:  

It is likely that the top link of the forward chain parted due to corrosion or damage of the welding of the link such that 
the load was no longer distributed to both sides of the link. As the links/chain were painted it was probably difficult to 
detect the fracture that had developed over time. 

The following lessons, applicable to all vessels using chain links as part of the load transmission from the davit or davit block 
to the lifeboat hook, were drawn from the incident: 

  Chains  should  be  replaced  at  regular  intervals  and/or  tested  by  DPI/Ultrasonic  testing  at  regular  intervals  to 
eliminate/detect parts with potential risk (although not required by the International Convention for the Safety of Life at 
Sea (SOLAS)), and this should then be included in the vessel maintenance system; 

  The  lifeboat  chain,  hooks  and  release  system  should  be  inspected  and  maintained  according  to  manufacturers’ 

recommendations, and should be included in the vessel maintenance system; 

 

It is recommended that lifeboats are lowered without personnel  onboard and boarding then carried out after the boat 
has been lowered, unless the boat is to be used for an emergency situation as directed by the master.  

The following actions were taken: 

 

Identification and inspection of all lifeboat equipment using chain links as part of the load transmission from davit or davit 
block to lifeboat hook; 

  Review of adequacy of inspection level and frequency as part of planned maintenance routines. 

 

3  Gimballed Frying Pan – Handle Assembly Failure    

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  Safety  Flash  11-21  (attached)  regarding  the  failure  of  the  handle  assembly  on  a 
gimballed galley frying pan. The incident had a very high potential of injury as the cook may well have been scalded or burnt. 
As the incident occurred during cleaning, it was fortunate that no injury occurred. 

Members are encouraged to check the integrity of fittings on gimballed frying pans.    

Further Information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.21.pdf  

 

 
4  Serious Injury as a Result of a fall from Height    

The Marine Safety Forum has published Safety Flash 11-23 (attached) regarding a serious injury which occurred as a result of 
a fall from height. A worker slipped and fell 3.5 meters onto concrete and suffered compound fractures of the left tibia and 
fibula. He was wearing a safety harness but had not hooked off.   

Further information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.23.pdf  

 

 
5  Fatality during Rope Access Work  

The Marine Safety Forum has published Safety Flash 11-24 (attached) regarding a recent fatality which occurred during rope 
access work.  

An investigation into this incident is currently in progress; as more information becomes available we will publish an update.  

Further Information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.24.pdf     

 

 
6  Collision between Vessel and Installation Resulting in Damage to Both   

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  Safety  Flash  11-25  (attached)  regarding  a  recent  collision  between  a  vessel  and  an 
installation which caused some damage to both vessel and installation.  

Further Information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.25.pdf. 

 

 

 
 

 

   

 

 
7  Mooring Line Operational Safety  

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has issued Marine Safety Alert 01-11 (attached) regarding the operational safety of 
mooring lines, which covers recent injuries and fatalities that have occurred during mooring line operations on vessels in US 
waters. 

The safety alert can be downloaded from the USCG’s ‘Homeport’ portal.  

 

 

 

 

Safety Flash 

 

