AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/12 

Safety Flash 

November 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Lifeboat Damaged Whilst Being Lowered on Davit 

A member has reported an incident in which a lifeboat was damaged.  The incident occurred when the davit was boomed out 
to lower the lifeboat.  The lowering was part of a functionality test after adjustment of limit switches by the manufacturer’s 
service engineers.  

Whilst booming out, one of the remote control wires for lifting the brake got trapped behind a wire sheave arrangement. 
When the wire became taut, the remote control wire lifted the static brake and the lifeboat started lowering while it was still 
above  the  deck.    The  lifeboat  got  stuck  on  its  protection  fender,  from  which  the  stainless  steel  turnbuckle  parted.    The 
lifeboat then swung out sharply and was damaged in several locations when it swung back in, hitting the side of the vessel. 
The lifeboat then descended to the water on the centrifugal brake control.  It was not possible to stop the process as the 
remote control wire remained stuck and taut, lifting the static brake.  

The lifeboat was moderately damaged, suffering a puncture hole in the starboard side bottom (approx. 5 x 5 cm), crushing 
damage to the fibre-glass on the starboard forward top (approx. 80 x 15 cm), and loss of some of the water sprinkler tubing, 
which  came  off  when  the  lifeboat  hit  the  side  of  the  vessel.    No  one  was  in  the  lifeboat  at  the  time  and  there  were  no 
injuries. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figures showing damage to lifeboat 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figures showing how remote wire got stuck behind a wire sheave arrangement 

 
During our members’ investigation the following points were noted: 

♦ 

♦ 

It was unclear when the remote control wire had slipped  in between the sheave and sheave guard.  It was  difficult  to 
observe the many obstacles which could potentially foul this wire; 

If the remote wire had been kept under adequate tension this would have prevented the likelihood of it fouling;  

♦  The  fact  that  the  lifeboat  could  be  lowered  while  not  yet  fully  boomed  out  could  be considered  a  design  error.    The 

manufacturers have been asked to investigate this further;  

♦  The likelihood that the remote wire could become fouled was not foreseen by the manufacturers, and there were no 

written procedures or instructions covering this. 

The following recommendations were made: 

♦  Persons  involved  with  lifeboat  lowering  and  recovery  should  ensure  that  the  remote  wires  are  constantly  out  of  the 

sheave and not fouled with any other rigging. 

2  Near Miss: Dropped Object 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  pipe-wrench  weighing  1.2kg  fell  15m  to  the  deck.    The  incident  occurred 
when hand tools were being hoisted up for use by personnel working at height. Two workers at height were preparing to lift 
three tools at once from the deck to their working platform, using a low pressure air hoist.  A tag line was attached to one 
of the tools to help guide and avoid entanglement.  Once the load could no longer be controlled by the tag line a “NO GO 
ZONE” was put in place and the DROPS zone directly below was cleared of personnel.  As the tools came to the level of the 
working  platform  one  of  them  got  caught  on  the  bottom  of  the  platform,  which tore the  stitching  of  the  single  leg  tether 
(rated  at  30lbs  breaking  strain).    The  result  was  that  the  tool  fell  15m  back  to  the  deck.    There  were  no  injuries.    The 
workplace was made safe and a safety stand-down was held. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figures: (L) pipe-wrench that fell (R) snapped single leg tether 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

♦  The crew had held a job safety analysis (JSA) meeting beforehand and identified and assembled the tools required for the 

job; 

♦  The immediate cause of the incident was that the tool became caught during the lift, which caused the DROPS tether 

stitching to tear, allowing the pipe wrench to fall to the deck below. 

Our member drew the following key lessons from the incident: 

♦  DROPS training plans should be continually emphasized; 

♦  Care should be taken with the safe work load (SWL) of straps and tethers used for hoisting tools; 

♦  Single leg tethers should not be used as lifting devices; 

♦  Establish a pre-use inspection and regular inspection cycle for DROPS equipment; 

♦  Carefully identify entanglement points on the lift route when hoisting tools aloft. 

Members’ attention is drawn to the following IMCA material which may be of assistance: 

 
♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SEL 019 Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA SPP 04 Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 05 Lifting equipment 

IMCA SPC 06 Working at height 

IMCA SPC 12 Avoiding dropped objects 

3  High Potential Near Miss: Dropped Object 

A member has reported an incident in which a piece of angle bar fell 11m to the deck.  The incident occurred when shipyard 
workers and third party contractors were in the process of removing a tensioner platform.  It was mistakenly assumed that 
contractors  had  completed  the  cutting  of  the  tensioner  platform,  as  all  barricade  tape  directly  under  the  cut  tensioner 
platform had been removed. 

Workers were rigging the tensioner platform to be lifted out when they noticed a piece of angle bar that had not been cut, 
hence, preventing the platform from being lifted.  A worker was deployed to cut the angle bar.  He cut the top side of the 
angle  bar  before  he  passed  the  cutting  torch  to  another  person  to  cut  the  bottom  part  of  the  angle  bar  because  it  was 
beyond his reach. This second person then cut off the angle bar and placed it on the scaffold before returning to his original 
task.  As he did so, he unwittingly kicked the angle bar off the scaffolding, and it fell to the deck below.  

Four members of the crew were on the deck when the piece of angle bar fell from scaffold platform above and landed next 
to  them,  approximately  1.5m  away.    Had  the  piece  of  angle  bar  struck  one  or  more  persons  in  that  group,  it  could  have 
caused severe or fatal injuries.  

An immediate safety stand down was held for all personnel involved.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figures: (L) Tensioner platform (R) showing where angle bar landed and bounced 

Figure showing piece of angle bar where it finally landed 

 

 

 
Our member found that the root causes of the incident were as follows:  

♦  One of the workers doing the cutting was not qualified to do this task; 

♦  The unqualified worker doing the cutting did not remove or secure the angle bar from the scaffold; 

♦  There was no barricading tape found below the scaffold platform. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

♦  All loose materials should be removed from all high level working platforms.  If this is not possible, all materials must be 

relocated away from the edge of platform and should be properly secured; 

♦  All areas underneath where work is taking place at height should be barriered off with hazard tape when overhead work 

is in progress, and should remain until after the overhead work is completed; 

♦  A guard worker may be posted outside the danger zone to prevent access to the hazardous dropped object zone; 

♦  Only properly trained and competent workers should be allowed to carry out the work; 

♦  Before work at height starts when the vessel is in the shipyard, appropriate inspection of the worksite should take place 

by qualified shipyard personnel. 

Members’ attention is drawn to the following IMCA material which may be of assistance: 

IMCA SEL 019 Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA SPP 04 Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 05 Lifting equipment 

IMCA SPC 06 Working at height 

IMCA SPC 12 Avoiding dropped objects 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

 

4  US Coast Guard Alert: Problem with Certain Kinds of Personal Flotation Device 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published the following Marine Safety Alert regarding certain Mustang Survival 
Inflatable PFDs with Hammar MA1hydrostatic (HIT) inflation systems which may not inflate and require a new re-arm kit to 
properly inflate by manual or automatic activation.  This safety alert identifies which products are affected.  Certain inflatable 
personal  flotation  devices  may  be  subject  to  delayed  or  non-inflations.    Further  information  can  be  downloaded  from 
www.fish.state.pa.us/newsreleases/2012press/uscg_alert_3-12.pdf 

