AB

 

 

Keywords:  Lifting 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/03 

July 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  Webbing Strop Failure during Transponder Recovery 

A  DSV  was  conducting  diving  operations  recovering  a  previously  installed  transponder  array.    During  the  transponder 
recovery the diver connected the transponder beacon’s webbing strop (supplied with the transponder) and a separate vessel 
strop on the tripod stand to the crane hook. 

The load was lifted off the bottom and the divers moved clear under the vessel.  The crane lifted the load 10m then slewed 
to  stern  and  carried  on  coming  up.    Upon  arrival  at  surface  the  transponder  beacon  was  found  to  be  missing.    Due  to 
compliance with safe crane and diving operations, there was no personal injury or subsea asset damage.  The transponder 
beacon was subsequently located close to original lifting position. 

In  the  resulting  investigation,  the  stitching  on  the  webbing  strop  on  the  transponder  beacon  was  found  to  have  failed.  
The webbing  strop  had  not  been  subjected  to  certification  or  maintenance.    In  communication  with  the  supplier,  the  hire 
company stated that the webbing strop was not supplied for lifting purposes but only for general handling. 

The company’s immediate actions were: 

 

Issue of a safety alert; 

  Removal of any hire company supplied webbing strops from all transponder beacons; 

  All  future  transponder  deployment  and  recovery  operations  are  to  be  carried  out  with  strict  adherence  to  company 

  All sites are to carry out a safety brief to make personnel aware of this incident; 

  Site  management  are  to  reiterate  with  personnel  the  requirement  to  carry  out  pre-use  visual  inspection  of  lifting 

procedure; 

equipment; 

The company has also noted the following longer term actions: 

  Discussion with transponder supplier of suitable lifting equipment arrangements; 

 

Issue of a company work instruction to identify suitable lifting arrangements for transponders; 

  Sharing of lessons learned with industry, through IMCA. 

2  Defective Hammer Shaft 

Keywords:  Hand tools 

To  support  a  new  client  policy,  a  company  was  changing  over  to  the  use  of  fibreglass  shafts  for  all  hammers  over  2lbs.  
One of the first to be sent offshore was a 14lb hammer.  Within a short period of use, the shaft showed signs of cracking just 
behind the head of the hammer.  Use was stopped and the defect reported. 

After discussion with the supplier and the client, all fibreglass handled hammers were withdrawn and the company involved 
has reverted to wooden shafts. 

 

 

 

 

The company involved has restated the importance of taking care in the selection of tools, noting that the latest technology 
may not be necessarily better than tried-and-tested equipment.  It reminds personnel that good pre-use inspection remains a 
critical requirement not to be ignored or bypassed. 

3  Fatality – Fall from Suspended Work Platform 

Keywords:  Fall 

A man was working on the lower level of a suspended modular scaffold.  He fell from the scaffold through a gap between two 
modular platform sections.  The plywood used to bridge the gap between the two platforms was found on the floor.  He fell 
from approximately 18 metres, sustaining severe injuries.  He was taken to hospital, but died from his injuries. 

The subsequent investigation noted the following contributory factors: 

the supervisor and his team had not received training concerning scaffolding procedures; 

the supervisor thought the scaffolding was safe merely because it was set up, so he authorised the person involved to go 
to the work location to complete previous day’s activity; 

there was a lack of communication between the sub-contractor setting up the scaffolds and the sub-contractor using the 
scaffolds; 

 

the victim had not recognised a 90° tube across the platform walkway as a barrier. 

4  Fire Incidents 

Keywords:  Fire 

Fire is one of the greatest risks to vessels and everybody needs to be on constant guard to prevent fires.  We have recently 
received the following reports of incidents involving fires. 

4.1  Fire in Crane 440V Contact Box 

In this incident, a contact burnt out and set fire to adjacent cables and auxiliary switches.  The complete contact, 
damaged cables and switches had to be renewed/repaired. 

The company involved has reinforced planned maintenance/regular inspection schedules. 

4.2  Fires involving Laundry Tumble Dryers 

4.2.1  Electrical Component 

In the first incident of this type, the main heater element in a tumble dryer overheated and ignited, possibly 
due to an insulation problem.  The only damage was to other electrical components. 

The defective part was replaced and all damaged areas were insulated. 

The company involved has added regular inspection of insulation properties by the ETO to its maintenance 
regimes. 

4.2.2  Lint Build-Up 

In  this  incident,  a  heater  element  overheated  due  to  a  fault  and  lint  (‘fluff’)  behind  the  drum  caught  fire.  
The fire  did  not  reach  the  vent.    Due  to  a  shortage  of  spare  parts  (the  dryer  was  old),  the  dryer  was 
replaced. 

As a precaution, the vent trunking was thoroughly cleaned with any build-up of lint removed and the piping 
was improved to give better exhaust capability. 

In this instance, the lint filters in the machine were found to be clean of build-up of lint, but the company 
involved has reiterated instructions to stewards on its vessels to ensure there is no build-up of lint prior to 
each use and to ensure that such units are never overloaded. 

Safety Flash 

 

4.3  Fire in Equipment Space – Welding in Vicinity 

During welding/burning on an adjacent wall or floor, a fire broke out in a machinery space on a vessel. 

The company involved has reiterated the importance of its permit-to-work (PTW) system, along with the need to 
perform job safety analyses (JSAs) for all ‘hot work’ performed outside of designated hot work areas. 

The company noted the following precautions to be included in the above: 

 

fire  watches  at  the  point  of  hot  operations  and  in  other  spaces  above  or  below  that  may  be  affected  by  the 
work; 

  portable fire extinguishers and fire blankets to be present; 

  combustibles to be cleared away prior to commencement of the work. 

