AB 

Safety Flash 

 May 2014 

 

 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/14 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  First Aid Injury: Thermos Cup Exploded After being in Hyperbaric Environment  

A member has reported an incident in which a brushed aluminium ‘Thermos’ style cup exploded after being taken out of a 
hyperbaric  environment.  The  incident  occurred  when  the  cup  –  which  had  been  in  Sat  at  -256  fsw  with  the  diver  –  was 
placed  in  the  medical  airlock  and  brought  to  the  surface.  Once  at  surface  pressure  the  Assistant  Life  Support  Technician 
(ALST)  removed  the  cup  and  placed  it  under  his  arm,  whereupon  a  violent  separation  of  the  cup  from  its  plastic  base 
occurred.  The  ALST  suffered  minor  bruising  and  the  cup  was  destroyed.  Immediate  medical  attention  was  given,  and  a 
proper  and  timely  notification  to  the  appropriate  authorities  was  made.  The  remains  of  the  cup  were  retained  for 
investigation.  

Our  members’  investigation  noted  that  the  diver  had  considered  that  there  was  no  risk  of  a  pressure  differential  as  the 
interface between the metal and the plastic base on the cup was of insufficient strength to allow  a pressure differential to 
form.  

Our member took the following actions: 

♦  Advised divers in saturation what had happened; 

♦  Asked them to check carefully for additional objects of a potentially hazardous nature.  

Our member made the following recommendations: 

♦  Allow this style of cup or vessel in the saturation chambers only if drilled to prevent pressure build up; 

♦  Add non-venting thermal vessels to the list of items forbidden for use in saturation chambers.   

   

  

 

 

  

   

 

Figures: Showing thermos cup after explosion 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident: 

♦ 

IMCA SF 08/06 – Incident 3: Trapped Pressure Release Incident. 

2  Hand  Injury  during  Retrieval  of  Personal  Protective  Equipment  (PPE)  Stored  Inside  a 

Compressor Unit   

An  incident  has  come  to  IMCA’s  attention  in  which  a  crewman  suffered  a  hand  injury  caused  by  a  slamming  door  on  a 
compressor unit. The incident occurred when a contractor worker took off his PPE and kept it inside the compressor whilst 
visiting  the  lavatory.  When  he  returned  and  retrieved  his  PPE  from  the  inside  of  the  compressor  unit,  a  part  of  the  door 
slammed due to high wind and caught his hand, resulting in an injury to his index finger. The injured person was rushed to 
hospital where he was received two stitches. 

Figures: Compressor unit with PPE and flammable materials inappropriately stored inside 

 

 

Investigation findings noted the following: 

♦  Using equipment enclosures as temporary storage can potentially lead to harm of people and damage to equipment; 

♦  The  worker  placed  his  PPE  inside  the  compressor  unit.  The  inside  of  the  compressor  unit  was  used  by  the  crew 

habitually as a storage area for PPE; 

♦  There were other flammable materials seen stored inside the compressor unit, which could potentially lead to major fire 

♦  There was no evidence of new risk assessment being conducted prior to recommencing of the work, and PPE was seen 

being stored inside the compressor unit the following day – the lessons were not learnt by the crew. 

and explosion;  

♦  The incident was not reported in a timely way;  

The following actions were taken: 

♦  Ensure all incidents are reported immediately; 

 
♦  Ensure no materials are stored inside any operational machinery;  

♦  Ensure PPEs/other materials are stored in designated area only. 

3 

 Crane Wire Rope Grip Incorrectly Fitted   

A  near  miss  incident  has  come  to  IMCA’s  attention  in  which  a  crane  wire  rope  termination  was  found  to  be  incorrectly 
fitted. Before starting work at a land-based site, a 30 tonne mobile crane was inspected, and a rope clamp (bulldog) attached 
to the hoist ropes ‘dead end’ was found to be incorrectly fitted causing crushing  and damage to the ‘live end’ of the wire 
rope (the part of the wire rope that takes the load strain). 

The incorrect selection or fitting of wire rope grips drastically reduces the efficiency of the wire rope terminations and can 
cause the wire rope to slip through the grips, potentially leading to the harm of people and damage to the equipment. 

The bridge of the clamp must always be fitted on the working part (live end) of the rope, and the U bolt on the rope tail 
(dead end) of the rope. 

Figure: wedge socket showing right and wrong method of termination 

 

For a wedge Socket, the wire rope grip should NOT be connected to the live rope. It should only be connected to the dead 
end of the rope.  Any clamping at all, bridge or U bolt, to the live end of a rope terminated with a wedge socket can cause 
damage and crushing and is not recommended.  

Figure: Showing incorrect fitting of wire rope grips 

 

 
The following lessons were learnt: 

♦  Ensure correct type of wire rope grip is selected when terminating wire ropes; 

♦  Ensure wire rope grips are correctly fitted;  

♦  Watch out for signs that may indicate broken wires; e.g. reduction in rope diameter, corrosion or rope deformation. 

Members may also wish to refer to IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

4  Crew Transfer Vessel in Collision with Anchor Wire   

A member has reported an incident in which an offshore wind farm crew transfer vessel (CTV) collided with an anchor wire 
under  tension.  The  incident  occurred  when  the  CTV  approached  the  starboard  side  boat  landing  of  a  cable  lay  barge. 
Difficulty  was  encountered  in  positioning  the  vessel  onto  the  boat  landing,  and  at  the  same  time,  a  pre-alarm  on  the  port 
engine sounded (indicating overheating exhaust gasses).  Owing to this  alarm  and the subsequent automatic intervention of 
the electronic engine management system, the CTV lost part of its propulsion power. At this point, the vessel was taken by 
the current towards the anchor wire. Due to sea conditions causing the CTV to move, the wire acted as a saw and caused 
significant  damage  to  the  wheelhouse.  After  this the  vessel  came  loose  of  the  anchor wire  and  the  current  took  the  CTV 
further away. There were no injuries.  

Figures: (L) Showing CTV caught by wire under tension, and damage to wheelhouse (R) Showing vessel undamaged 

 

 

During our members’ investigation, the following points were noted: 

♦  A similar incident had happened with the same CTV earlier in the year; 

♦  Crew  transfers  are  executed  so  often  that  they  can  be  considered  as  a  routine  activity  (‘taxi’)  leading  to  risks  being 

overlooked and complacency setting in; 

conditions differ for each project;  

♦  Crew  transfer  is  an  important  activity  and  should  be  formally  risk  assessed  on  each  project  since  environmental 

♦  Reporting, communicating and follow-up of incidents and near misses is important since this incident would have been 
prevented had the previous incident been properly reported, correctly communicated and follow-up had been in place 
and adhered to. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

♦  The following safety flashes refer to incidents involving the crew transfer vessels used in the offshore renewables industry: 

− 

− 

− 

− 

IMCA SF 06/13 – Incident 1: Crew transfer vessel trapped under a boat landing 

IMCA  SF  12/13  –  Incident  3:  Incidents  of  failure  of  jet  drives  on  wind  farm  service  vessels,  and  Incident  4:  Wind  farm 
service vessel in collision with wind turbine foundation 

IMCA SF 16/13 – Incident 4: LTI Crewman injured foot during offshore renewables mooring operation 

IMCA SF 06/14 – Incident 2: Near Miss: Strong Sun Glare Contributes to Heavy Impact on Boat Landing, Incident 3: Near 
Miss Incidents during Personnel Transfer to Offshore Renewable Energy Installations and Incident 4: Navigational Near Miss 
in Restricted Visibility. 

♦  The following safety flashes refer to incidents where complacency was identified as a factor: 

− 

IMCA SF 02/00 – Incident 5: Damage to main hoist rope on Liebherr 1080/1 crane 

 

− 

− 

IMCA SF 07/05 – Incident 1: ROV free-fall incident 

IMCA SF 11/12 – Incident 1: LTI: Hand Injury. 

5 

Injury Caused by Movement of Wire Rope under Tension 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  someone  was  injured  by  an  anchor  wire  that  skidded  off  unexpectedly  off  a 
flatbed  trailer.  The  incident  occurred  on  a  beach  during  cable  installation  operations,  when  personnel  were  connecting 
midline  buoys  to  an  anchor  wire.  The  injured  person  sustained  a  broken  foot  but  the  incident  had  the  potential  to  be  a 
fatality. 

Position of the injured person at time of the incident 

Anchor wire after the accident 

Original track of the anchor wire 

Figure: Showing scene of incident 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed one of the root causes was lack of knowledge of what was happening at the worksite: 
persons involved were not aware of the fact that tension is still in a wire even when hanging slack and lying on the beach for 
a considerable length (700 meters). 

The lesson learnt is that it is in the nature of a wire rope that there will always be stored or residual energy in a length of it. 
This introduces a range of potential safety issues including manual handling and unexpected release of energy when handling 
the wire ropes. These issues should be taken into account in job planning, tool box talk and risk assessment before the start 
of the job.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: wire rope, tension, stored energy): 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 05/03 – Incident 2: Fatality During Cable-Pulling Operations; 

IMCA SF 17/08 – Incident 3: Stored Energy – Injury Sustained Whilst Removing Metal Strap;  

IMCA SF 13/13 – Incident 3: Crewman Injured Whilst Changing Out Crane Wire. 

6  Master Link and Sub-Link Failures on Lifting Equipment   

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  two  separate  incidents  in  which  there  were 
failures  of  master  links  and  sub-links  on  lifting  slings.  Although  no  personnel  were  injured,  the  potential  severity  of  such 
incidents was very serious.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.08.pdf.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident (key words: master, link, failure): 

♦ 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 1: Offshore Tank Container Rigging Failure. 

  

 

