AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 19/15 

Safety Flash 

  November 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes provide 
in good faith safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the Association 
or its members. 

 

All  the  incidents  in  this  Safety  Flash  involve  the  Crew  Transfer  Vessels  used  by  members  in  the  offshore 
renewables industry. 

1  Near Miss During Transfer Operations from a Crew Transfer Vessel (CTV) to a Turbine Tower 

A member has reported a near miss incident during transfer operations between an offshore renewables industry CTV and a 
turbine tower.  The incident occurred during the pick up of crew from a tower – a crew transfer vessel was pushing on to the 
tower  and  started  transferring  crew.    The  weather  was  workable 
but there was a long high swell which was considered manageable.  
When the high swell came the transfer was stopped, and restarted 
when safe to do so.  The swell caused the vessel to go up and down 
for five rungs on the ladder.  As it did so, a person was briefly left 
suspended  by  his  fall  arrest  equipment  when  the  boat  moved 
suddenly under the influence of the swell.  There were no injuries. 

After pushing on with maximum engine power and monitoring the 
swell, the first person was asked to come down.  The person was 
transferred to the crew vessel with his fall arrester still attached to 
the tower.  This person stepped back too fast and the inertia reel 
mechanism  in  his  fall  arrester  temporarily  locked.    The  deckhand 
tried  to  help  this  person  with  unhooking  from  the  fall  arrester.  
Unexpectedly the swell came in and the vessel moved down, causing 
the person to be lifted into the air and temporarily suspended by his 
fall arrester.  As the deckhand was holding on tight to the fall arrest 
equipment, he too was lifted off his feet.  When the vessel came up 
again the deckhand jumped back on deck, while the person remained 
on the ladder.  The vessel moved up and down but no-one was hurt 
as the fender of the boat and boat landing were designed to leave 
space between ladder and persons. 

Further  personnel  transferring  from  that  tower  to  the  CTV  were 
asked to disconnect the fall arresters at the last five rungs of the ladder.  All further transfers took place safely. 

It  is  be  noted  that  there  were  around  one  hundred  (100)  personnel  transfers  conducted  safely  on  that  day  and  that  this 
unexpected swell occurred only once.  

The fall arrest equipment was checked and found to be in good condition.  The root causes of the incident were found to be 
incorrect work procedures, and insufficient awareness.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: fall, arrest, turbine, transfer): 

IMCA SF 02/10 – Incident 2 Near miss: improper use of fall-arrest equipment leads to fall; 

IMCA SF 06/14 – Incident 3 Near miss incidents during personnel transfer to offshore renewable energy installations; 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 02/15 – Incident 5 Near miss: man overboard [from CTV]. 

  

 
2  Rigging Incident: Damage to Bow Hand Rail on a Crew Transfer Vessel (CTV)  

A member has reported an incident in which the bow rail of an offshore renewables crew transfer vessel was damaged.  The 
incident occurred whilst retrieving a buoy and clump weight on the seabed next to a wind turbine generator monopole.  The 
line attached to the weight snagged, damaging the vessels bow railing.  Crew were on the foredeck retrieving a buoy from the 
monopile (attached to a clump weight of 15-20kg which was on the seabed). 

Once the buoy had been lifted on-board, two riggers quickly began retrieving the loose line until it became taut against the 
weight on the seabed.  As they began to pull the weight up from the seabed it became snagged.  The riggers fixed the line to 
the forward cleat so that they could reposition themselves to pull harder.   Unknown to the Master, as his vision was very 
restricted with a large grey storage box on the foredeck, the riggers had pulled the line over the top rail and made fast to the 
bollard below.  The rope drew tight and personnel positioned themselves away from the bow to avoid the snap back zone.  
The rope did not snap but it cut through the top rail and broke the middle rail off completely. 

Showing damaged bow rail on CTV. 

Sketch showing weight, box and line, and photo. 

 

 

Our member noted the following: 

  A toolbox talk had been held on-board, including the Master and superintendent before the work took place, and at no 

point was it discussed that the line would be tied to the forward cleat; 

  The incident was  discussed on-board after its occurrence  and it was highlighted that in the event of snagging, the line 

should never be tied to the vessel and nothing should ever be tied over the handrails; 

  The handrail was repaired on the next maintenance day. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: rigging, CTV): 

 

IMCA SF 07/15 – Incident 4 Minor damage to pontoon cleat during crew transfer vessel mooring operation. 

3  An Error with Fire Flaps Led to Engine Space Flooding, Causing Costly Damage 

A member has reported an incident in which there was sea-water flooding of one of the engine spaces on a  crew transfer 
vessel, leading to significant and expensive equipment damage.  The immediate cause of the flood was a small error - fire flaps 
not being secured properly.  

Some days before the incident, the engine space fire flaps had been operated. But the retaining pin to hold the fire flap open 
had not been returned to the correct position.  This led to the fire flap bouncing shut on the next occasion when the vessel 
was out in moderate seas.  With the fire flap now shut the engine air intake began to loosen fixings within the engine space 
due to its immense suction.  One of the fixings loosened was the toilet overboard pipe.  With no-one aware of it until the bilge 
alarm sounded, the engine room had been filling quickly with sea water as the suction, combined with gravity, drew it in. 

On the way back to port and long before the cause of the flooding had been realised, the engine room continued to flood.  
The  engine  room  bilge  pump  became  blocked  and  the  manual  bilge  pump  (whale  gusher)  quickly  perished  after  a  lot  of 
operation.  The mobile suction bilge pump was used to contain the water level. 

The vessel returned to port  on one engine, with the other engine bay flooding up to its engine mounts and the engine in 
reduced  power  mode.    The  flooding  caused  the  engine  on  that  side  to  require  substantial  servicing  and  repair  to  remove 
damaged parts and water residue/ emulsified oil from its machinery and drive gear, resulting in significant off-hire time.  There 
were no injuries or risk to life, but it was an extremely expensive lesson to learn.  

 
Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: flooding, crew): 

 

 

IMCA SF 05/10 – Water ingress to bow thruster space; 

IMCA SF 16/14 – Near miss: engine room flooding.  

4  Vessel Made Contact with Installation 

A member has reported an incident in which a vessel made contact with part of a well-head installation, causing damage to the 
installation.  The incident occurred when the vessel was conducting cargo operations alongside a well-head installation; after a 
period where small cargo loads were being transferred, the crew of the installation advised the vessel that they had a larger 
cargo unit to land on deck, which required the crane block to be swapped. 

With the break in cargo operations and forthcoming larger cargo load, the Master took the decision to send the on-watch 
second mate down to deck to assist the two ABs.  The second mate complied, leaving the Master alone on the bridge.  Shortly 
after this, the Master made the decision to take the vessel out of joystick mode and into manual control; he then set the vessel’s 
controls  in  an  attempt  to  maintain  station  whilst  he  visited  the  washroom  on  the  bridge.    During  his  time  away  from  the 
controls, the vessel lost position and began drifting towards the installation.  Seeing the vessel moving closer to the installation, 
the deck crew radioed the bridge with no response.  The Master came out of the washroom and noticed the vessel’s movement 
but was too late to regain control and prevent contact.  The vessel’s stern roller impacted on one of the installation’s legs, 
causing damages to both vessel and installation. 

Our member noted the following: 

  There was  serious complacency: the Master subsequently stated that in previous instances the controls were also left 
unattended as long as the propulsion was counteracting the effects of environment (sea current, wind, etc.) and the position 
was visually maintained; 

  There was failure to properly assess the risks involved in: 

leaving the vessel in manual manoeuvring mode; 

leaving the bridge controls unattended. 

  The Master failed to comply with COLREGs Rule 5 (Look-out); 

 

 

 

considering the second officer’s attendance on deck as being more important than on the bridge; 

  Both the Master and the second mate did not follow existing company safety management system procedures stating that 

“as a minimum, there shall be 2 persons on the Bridge, where at least one is a certified watch-keeping officer”; 

  The second mate should have exercised the STOP WORK POLICY when instructed to leave the bridge. 

The following actions were taken: 

  The vessel had to go to port for repairs and was off-hire for some time; 

  The Master was replaced at the request of the client; 

Key lessons learnt: 

  Personnel are still failing to correctly exercise the STOP WORK POLICY; all personnel are expected to exercise the 

STOP WORK POLICY at all times where unsafe acts or conditions occur; 

  Over-confidence  and  complacency  are  serious  failings;  complacent  attitudes  and  failure  to  correctly  apply  industry, 

company and client procedures are leading to incidents and injuries; 

  Poor risk assessment leads to a lack of preparedness; control of work processes are in place to allow employees to control 

their work and environments. Failure to effectively apply these means our work begins to control us; 

  Full awareness of, and compliance with, company safety management systems, is vital.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: collision):  

 

 

 

IMCA SF 13/14 – Incident 5 unplanned vessel contact with an installation during lifting operations; 

IMCA DP Safety Flash 03/15 – Marine safety forum – safety flash 15-18: collision with rig;  

IMCA SF 09/15 – Incident 6 Aberdeen harbour: annual summary of marine safety reports for 2013.   

