Safety Flash 

March 2018 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  Catastrophic Engine Failure Resulting in A Fire on A Crew Transfer Vessel  

What happened? 

its  report 

The UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) has 
published 
failure  and 
subsequent  fire  on  board  the  crew  transfer  vessel 
Windcat 8, which occurred offshore Lincolnshire, UK, in 
September 2017.  

into  an  engine 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

There was a catastrophic engine failure and subsequent 
fire on the 15 metre windfarm crew transfer vessel (CTV).  
The  engine  damage  was  caused  by  a  big  end  bearing 
failure.   

There were no injuries to the two crew or the 12 embarked wind turbine technicians.  The fixed firefighting system 
was operated, but it was ineffective because not all the engine space vents had been closed.  The fire caused only 
minor damage and eventually extinguished when it ran out of fuel. 

Recommendations 

The MAIB recommended that training and guidance be provided to CTV crews on the action to be taken in the event 
of critical propulsion alarms, and to ensure they are familiar with the use of fixed fire-fighting systems. 

The full report from MAIB can be found here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Fire on offshore renewables industry crew transfer vehicle (CTV) 

 

 

Finger Injury During Recovery of Daughter Craft 

 
2 

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published a Safety Alert relating to a 
line of fire finger injury sustained during small boat operations.  The incident 
occurred  while  the  vessel was  recovering the  Daughter Craft  after  a man 
overboard exercise.  The boatman took hold of the master link, and as he 
hooked the link into the Daughter Craft hook, his left index finger became 
caught  between  the  master  link  and  the  lifting  wire  thimble,  resulting  in 
injury to the finger. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The MSF notes that recovery operation of a rescue craft is a high-risk task 
and  full  cooperation  of  all  involved  is  crucial  to  complete  the  operation 
without any incidents.  The investigation of the incident established that: 

  The lifting wire’s thimble diameter allowed the thimble to freely move 
all around the master Link and could move close to someone’s fingers 
increasing the likelihood of them being trapped;  

  The procedure and risk assessment used for the task were not adequate; 

  Established previous practice being followed, may have contributed to the incident. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

 

Investigate provision of master links that could provide a better protection to the boatmen’s hands and fingers 
during  inserting  of  the  master  link  into  the  rescue  craft  hook,  by  preventing  the  wire’s  thimble  from  free 
movement; 

  Review and amend as appropriate, task risk assessments and specific procedures for operation of rescue craft. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Small boat deployment near miss incident 

3  Workboat Failed During Transfer Operations Due to Fuel Contamination 

What happened? 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  a  Safety 
Alert  regarding an  incident in which a  workboat’s  engine 
cut  out.    The  incident  occurred  during  a  crew  transfer 
operation by workboat.  The crew’s engineer made several 
unsuccessful attempts to restart the engine.  The Coxswain 
made contact with the vessel Master and advised him of 
the  situation.    The  vessel  proceeded  to  attend  and  the 
workboat was safely recovered.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

Vessel engineers discovered that the fuel in the tank was 
contaminated due to water condensation causing a build-up of bacteria.  The source of contamination was water 
or moisture in the tank due to condensation in the tank head space; this resulted in a build-up of bacteria turning 
into sediment.  The sediment caused the fuel oil fine filter to clog preventing the engine from starting. 

 

 
Planned maintenance system (PMS) instructions with respect to inspection and maintenance were clear, but had 
not been followed.  The vessel did not hold spare filters on board. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Check fuel and tank quality through planned maintenance inspections, treat and/or clean as applicable; 

  Ensure workboat fuel tank levels are maintained to prevent condensation/water building up; 

  Ensure a stock of essential fuel filters are held on board. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Two cases of contaminated drinking water 

4  Vessel/Platform Collision – Mooring Bollard Broken by Vessel 

What happened? 

A  platform  supply  vessel  (PSV)  approached  a  platform  to  deliver  the  cargo  via  snatch  lift.    After  starting  cargo 
operations, it  appeared  that  the crane  did not  have enough boom reach, so the  vessel  was taken closer to the 
platform (at around 1 m distance).  There were 2m waves at the time.  

The  vessel’s  stern  collided  with  the  platform  mooring  bollard  which  was  damaged.    No  one  was  injured.    This 
damage was allegedly not noticed at the time by the crew, and was identified and reported by the client at a later 
stage. 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

Our  member  notes  that  this  incident  happened  recently  and  is  under  investigation.    Detailed  information  and 
additional  lessons  learned,  if  any,  will  be  communicated  at  a  later  date.    Our members’  initial  findings were  as 
follows: 

  Given  the  unfavourable  operational  conditions,  there  was  excessive  exposure  to  risk,  possibly  driven  by 

inadequate planning.  The operation should have stopped when conditions were found unsafe; 

  Concerns  had  been  raised  previously,  relating  to  the  absence  of  fenders  and  mooring  buoys  around  the 
platform, and regarding the limited reach of the crane.  These had not been addressed.  Vessel management 
should keep their fleet management informed of operational hazards and enable corrective actions with clients 
and other 3rd parties, as needed. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Ensure  that  there  is  properly  documented  and  agreed  guidance  available  on  methods  of  safely  approaching 
platforms, on escape routes and on go/no-go zones, particularly when new locations are involved. 

 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Vessel activities near platforms – two incidents; 

  Property Damage: Platform Supply Vessel collided with legs of jack-up rig. 

5  Accidental Mixing of Different Fuel Oils 

What happened? 

A  vessel  was  at  anchorage  waiting  for  the  pilot.    The  engine  room  was 
manned  and the main  engine  ready  for manoeuvring.    The  duty  engineer 
informed the bridge that two valves on the fuel transfer line were kept open 
overnight.  These were the valve for Ultra Low Sulphur Fuel Oil tank no 6 
(starboard) and valve for Heavy Fuel Oil tank no.6 (Centre starboard).  

It was observed on the remote gauging system that the quantity of fuel in 
the Ultra Low Sulphur Fuel Oil tank no 6 (starboard) was considerably less 
than the previous day. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

All valves on the fuel transfer line were closed and soundings were taken for 
all  tanks.    It  was  found  that  57  tonnes  of  Ultra  Low  Sulphur  Fuel  Oil  from  tank  no.6  (S)  had  been  accidently 
transferred by gravity to Heavy Fuel Oil tank no.6 (CS), due to the initial higher level in the first tank (tank no.6 (S)). 

Samples from tank no.6 (CS) and ULSFO settling tank were taken and landed ashore for urgent sample analysis. 

Results from the laboratory confirmed that fuel was contaminated due to mixing. 

Our member noted the following 

  There was financial and reputational loss: 

  cost for urgent sample analysing 
  company’s reputation with the shipowner; 

  The immediate cause was carelessness – failure to operate the fuel valve correctly; 

  Causal  factors  identified  were  inadequate  supervision  or  management  –  a  lack  of  adequate  oversight  and 

  The root cause identified was inadequate compliance with existing procedures. 

monitoring; 

What actions were taken? 

Persons involved were referred back to company procedures, and a notice with the fuel oil transfer procedures 
displayed near the operating panel. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

 

Isolation of Fuel Tanks; 

  Cargo contamination causing LTIs during clean-up; 

  Near Miss: Engine Room Flooding. 
 

 

 

 
6  Unexpected Release of Water During Annual Maintenance of CO2 Fixed Firefighting System 

What happened 

An  incident  took  place  during  annual  maintenance  of  CO2  fixed 
firefighting  equipment  on  a  vessel,  in  the  emergency  generator 
switchboard  room.    There  was  an  unplanned  and  unexpected 
release of water.   

As  part  of  the  annual  maintenance  of  the  CO2  fixed  firefighting 
system, air was blown at 7 bar through the lines.    As part of this 
check, a person was located in the CO2 room on the starboard side 
of  the  main  deck,  an  engineer  was  in  the  emergency  generator 
room located below the switchboard and the vessel electrician was 
in the switchboard room to witness the tripping of the emergency 
generator room supply fan. 

What went wrong? 

When the task started, a fine mist was noticed coming from one of the nozzle heads in the emergency generator 
switchboard  room.    Further  to  this,  water  was  seen  spraying  out  of  the  nozzles  onto  the  440V  and  220V 
switchboards, transformers and surrounding areas.  An all stop was immediately called over the radio. 

What were the causes? 

The source of the water has not been identified, however it is suspected to have been as a result of condensation 
forming in the pipework supplying the nozzles.  These pipes are of considerable length. 

IMCA notes that compressed air systems should be blown through before connection, to ensure that there is no 
water in the air system which may be transferred into the system being blown through.   

What actions were taken? 

Following the incident, the vessel team placed bags with a small air vent onto 
the nozzle heads to collect any unexpected release of water during checks; 

  Nozzle heads to be covered appropriately during these tests; 

 

the planned maintenance system was updated to include instructions 
to  cover  nozzles  within  electrical  switchboard  spaces  and  any  other 
sensitive areas during these tests; 

  other vessels and third-party contractors were advised to take similar 

precautions. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Fixed CO2 Fire Extinguishing Systems – US Coast Guard Alert. 

 

