AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 19/16 

Safety Flash 

 July 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary   

All the incidents in this safety flash involve personnel actually injured in the workplace. 

1 

Injury Caused by Shifting Load Of Pipes 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published a safety alert regarding an incident in which a crewman suffered a 
broken leg.  The injury occurred when the crewman got his leg caught under a bundle of pipes that shifted whilst 
preparing them for a lift.  It took fifteen minutes to free the injured crewman, and helicopter medevac ashore was 
necessary.

Further information is available from www.marinesafetyforum.org/images/msf-safety-alert-16.07.pdf. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: hose): 

 

 

IMCA SF 08/06 – Incident 2 – Serious injury during pipestalk rolling operations; 

IMCA SF 05/14 – Incident 2 – RWC: Injury to foot caused by moving roller. 

  

2 

Lost Time Injury (LTI) – Loss of End of Thumb 

The MSF has published a safety alert regarding an incident in which a crew member lost the end of his thumb.  The 
incident occurred during the installation of an additional security gate at the top of the gangway.  The injured person 
was holding the gate in position while a second crew member located the bolts.  To access one of the securing bolts, 

 
the second crew member closed the pilot door without warning, trapping 
the injured person’s finger between the gate and the pilot door.  As a 
consequence, the injured person lost the top of his right thumb above 
the first knuckle. 

The immediate causes were observed to be: 

Inadequate work planning or programming – the work was viewed 
as everyday which resulted in an inadequate risk assessment; 

  The lack of guards or barriers; 

 

 

 

 

3 

Lack  of  communication  between  the  two  parties  involved  in  the  task  –  a  basic  and  simple  warning  that 
something was going to change would have sufficed and an accident would have been avoided – “watch out, 
I’m closing the door”. 

Further information is available from www.marinesafetyforum.org/images/msf-safety-alert-16.01.pdf. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: finger): 

IMCA SF 03/09 – Incident 3 – Crushed finger [in a dive chamber door]; 

IMCA SF 04/16 – Incident 4 – Finger injury during maintenance work – restricted work case. 

“Routine” Task, Non-Routine Result: A Fall from A Crane Ladder Leads to an LTI 

A member has reported an incident  in which  a crewman fell from a fixed ladder injuring himself.    The incident 
occurred when, after familiarising the shore-side crane operator, an Able Seaman (AB) was descending the crane 
ladder.  His right foot slipped on the second rung of the ladder from bottom.  He lost his hand grip on the ladder 
and fell down backward from a height of half a meter, with his buttocks touching the floor first resulting in lower 
back pain.  He was referred to hospital for further examination of the injury and was declared unfit for duties for 
seven days. 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The ladder steps were free from oil/grease and clean; 

  Correct and clean personal protective equipment (PPE) was being worn: 

 

 

the injured person’s safety shoes were in good condition with no traces of oil/grease on the soles 

the cotton gloves he was wearing were also free of any oil/grease; 

  The injured person was not firmly holding onto the ladder with his hands while descending the ladder; 

  He was sufficiently rested before the incident; 

  The immediate cause was carelessness – right foot slipping off from crane ladder rung, a loose hand grip on 

the ladder while descending; 

  A causal factor was improper motivation – lack of focus towards the task in hand; 

  The root cause was that the risk was seen as tolerable – this was a routine and recurring task. 

The following preventative actions were identified: 

  All crew to be reminded to be more safety conscious especially while going down ladders – ensure footing is 

secure and that there is no rush or hurry when on ladders; 

  Care to be taken to ensure safety shoes and gloves are free from oil/grease stains; 

  Care to be taken when conducting routine work, especially by less experienced crew. 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 09/15 – Incident 1 – “Routine” task – non-routine result: batteries stored sideways leak battery acid; 

IMCA SF 09/15 – Incident 2 – “Routine” activities –non-routine result: finger injury during welding; 

IMCA SF 20/15 – Incident 1 – Recent slips, trips and falls involving stairs. 

4  Restricted Work Case (RWC): Injury to Eye During Deck Washing 

A member has reported an incident in which a crew member was injured while washing down the main deck.  While 
washing, the hose had developed a twist.  The crew member, an Ordinary Seaman, wedged the nozzle between his 
left hand and chest and tried to remove the twist with the other hand.  He lost control of the nozzle which resulted 
in the water jetting onto his face.  The impact was directly onto his goggles, which were blown off by the sudden 
release of water pressure, allowing water to enter directly impact his right eye.  He suffered corneal abrasion and 
slight bleeding.  First aid was given on board. 

Our member’s findings were as follows: 

  There was a lack of situational awareness; 

  There were inadequate resources for the job in hand – no-one was there to assist; 

  The correct PPE was being worn; 

 

Immediate cause: clearing twist(s) in a pressurized water hose without first securing it to prevent uncontrolled 
movement due to the rapid increase of water pressure; 

  Causal factor: inadequate resources and inadequate supervision; 

  Root cause: The risk was seen as tolerable, as this (cleaning the deck with pressurised hoses) was a routine 
recurring task.  Also there was a lack of situational awareness and a failure to reassess potential safety hazards 
and thus consider a different course of action. 

Our member took the following preventative actions: 

  Further on board training for crew in safe handling of hoses under pressure; 

  Ensured adequate resources stationed where required; 

  Ensured better supervision by heads of department; 

  Consideration of visored safety helmets, which will act as additional protection; 

  Tie a tail rope near the nozzle that will help secure a pressurized hose to the ship’s structure before clearing 

twists or operating the main valve. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: stored): 

 

IMCA  SF  18/15  –  Incident 4  –  Lost  time  injury  (LTI)  following  stored  energy  release  and  subsequent  serious 
infection of wound; 
  Whilst this is a subsea incident involving a diver, it is similar in that injury was caused by unplanned release 
of stored pressure, with consequent risk of infection from water getting into the wound, as might have 
occurred here in slightly different circumstances. 

5  Worker Seriously Injured When 1 Tonne Load Fell on Him 

The  UK  Health  and  Safety  Executive  (UKHSE)  has  successfully  prosecuted  a  cargo  handling  company  after  an 
employee suffered serious injury when a sheet of marble weighing one tonne fell on him.  The incident occurred 
when the worker was assisting a fork lift truck operator to move a one tonne sheet of marble from a container.  The 
marble sheet fell on him, causing him serious and extensive crush injuries to his legs as well as a fractured sternum 
and severe lacerations to the back of his head. 

 
The HSE investigation found that there was an unsafe system of work being used to move the load. 

Further information can be found on the UK HSE’s website here. 

IMCA will continue to draw to members’ attention to onshore incidents such as this involving the movement or 
lifting of heavy loads, working at height, dropped objects, etc. where it is considered that there are lessons to be 
learned. 

