Safety Flash 

May 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Theme: Dropped Objects 

This safety flash brings together five incidents relating to dropped objects or potential dropped objects.  In the first, 
someone was injured when equipment fell after being unsecured.  In the second, lack of understanding of how 
magnetic lifting equipment worked led to a lost time injury (LTI).  The third incident covers the fall to deck from 
16m of a part weighing 600kg.  The last two incidents are near miss incidents relating to potential dropped objects. 

1  Dropped Object Injury: Equipment Shifted When It Was Incorrectly Unsecured  

What happened? 

On a cable laying vessel, a cable quadrant had been rigged on the bulwarks, seated in a pedestal mounting and 
secured via lashings on the outboard side.  Normal operations required the deck crane to be secured and taking the 
quadrant’s weight before the securing was removed.   However, during this incident, the securing was removed 
before the deck crane was secured. 

As a result of being unsecured, movement in the cable caused the quadrant to topple and fall to the deck, striking 
a crewman in the leg. The incident caused minor grazing to the leg and soreness.  First aid was administered and 
the  crewman  returned  to work  for  the  next  watch.   The  incident  could  easily have  resulted  in more  serious or 
permanent injuries.  Our member treated as a high potential near miss.  

What were the causes of the incident? 

  Failure to correctly follow procedure and secure the deck crane before the lashing were removed; 

  Failure to clearly identify who was in charge; 

  Reliance on control measures (outboard securings) that provided only a single point of failure. 

 

 

 

 
What lessons were learnt? 

  Communication & Control – it is essential to identify who is charge before starting lifting operations.  This avoids 

confusion or miscommunication, and should be highlighted during Toolbox Talks; 

  Control measures should be reviewed to identify potential improvements.  Although certain control measures 
may have worked in the past, we should always review them to see if improvements can be made.  In this 
example,  fixing  the  pedestal  mounting  itself  would  have  reduced  the  risk  of  toppling  when  the  outboard 
securing was removed – or even if the securing had failed during operations; 

  All crew should be aware of the control measures that are in place, where to find them, and how to maintain 
them during operations.  Again, this should be done by reviewing job safety assessment (JSA) during the Toolbox 
Talk and by conducting site walk-about before beginning. 

Actions 

  The pedestal mounting will be fitted with tipped bolts to secure it directly to the bulwark in future;  

  Management will designate a specific person in charge for deck operations. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Unsecured object fell and injured crewman; 

 

 

Loading and securing of containers; 

Loading and securing of cargo. 

2 

LTI as a Result of Load Dropped from Lifting Magnet 

What happened? 

A load dropped from a permanent lifting magnet hit a person’s hand resulting in an LTI.  Polished metal elements 
had to be lifted a few centimetres with a permanent lifting magnet, in order to put supports underneath it.  This 
task had taken place without mishap around one hundred times when the 
load dropped without warning. 

The injured person had performed this operation around ten times.  He 
knew  about  the  need  for  a  protective  layer  and  used  packing  paper  as 
advised by his colleagues.  At a certain point, however, with no specific 
reasons he could recall afterwards, rather than use paper packing material 
(of thickness 0.1mm) he instead used foil packing material (of thickness 
between 1.5 and 2.0 mm.) 

As  the  polished  element  load  was  lifted,  he  reached  over  it  to  remove 
some packing material.  By chance one of his hands was under the load 
when it dropped.  The load hit his hand, causing an LTI. 

What were the causes? 

  There was insufficient technical understanding of the magnetic lifting 

system and its requirements; 

  There were undocumented “common practices” in use by experienced 

crew that were not completely understood by all; 

  The  criticality  of  the  ‘air  gap’  was  not  addressed  in  any  JSAs  and 

toolbox talks; 

  The injured person had not realized the criticality of the ’air gap’ when 

he used thick foil instead of thin paper; 

 

The protective layer 

To  avoid  any  damage  to  a  polished 
metal piece being lifted by a magnet, a 
protective layer is placed between the 
magnet  & 
the  polished  surface.  
Typically, this can be a piece of paper.  

Magnet holding capacity and the “air 
gap” 

The  holding  capacity  of  a 
lifting 
magnet  depends  on  the  full  and 
uninterrupted  operation  of 
the 
magnetic  field.    For  that  purpose  the 
lifted  object  should  have  a  minimum 
thickness,  and  any  non-magnetic 
separation between a magnet’s lifting 
surface  and  the  load,  called  the  ‘air 
gap’, reduces the holding power.  

This so-called ‘air gap’ can be anything 
including  scale  or  paint  or 
the 
“protective layer”. 

 

 
  The work instruction was not detailed or specific enough.  There was no specific information on: 

  operator instructions pertaining to the selected magnet 
 

the reason for the protective layer 

  exactly what the protective material should be and how thick – merely that it should be “cloth” 

 

the importance of the ‘air gap’ and its effect on the holding capacity of the lifting magnet; 

  Nobody  had  challenged  the  work  instruction  and  crew  had  continued  with  what  they  considered  to  be  a 

common practice: use a piece of paper. 

Load tests after the incident revealed that using this thicker foil instead of thin paper reduced the magnet’s lifting 
capacity to such a degree that there was no safety margin left.  As a result, the load had been lifted just a few 
centimetres when it dropped.  

Lessons learned 

Our member notes that permanent lifting magnets are proven reliable lifting appliances but with known and well 
documented limitations.  Care should be taken to ensure that: 

  Full circulation of information – from operator’s manuals, lifting plans, work instructions, risk assessments etc. 

– to all persons involved in the use of such equipment; 

  Full understanding – all persons involved should fully understand the limitations and precautions to be taken, 

including any limitations, for example minimum thickness of the load or the effect of any ‘air gap’;  

  Full  sharing  of  knowledge  with  respect  to  undocumented  “common  practices”  that  may  be  known  to 

experienced persons, but not others. 

3  Dropped Object: Lay Tower Adjuster Leg Pin  

What Happened 

The securing pin from a  Tiltable Lay System (TLS) adjuster leg, weighing 600 kg, fell 16m to deck.   The incident 
occurred when the keeper plate bolts slackened off.  No-one was in the immediate area below the adjuster leg at 
the time of the event and no-one was injured. 

At  the  time  of  the  incident  there  was  an  umbilical  in  the  tower,  but  the  umbilical  was  not  being  deployed.    If 
deployment operations had been ongoing, then there would have been the potential for further consequences if 
the top tension were to have been above the survival capacity of one adjuster leg. 

Right: Close-up of the adjuster leg housing (with bolts, keeper plate and pin missing) 

 

 

 

 

The pin 

Renewed locking key anti rotation bolts and 

 

 

greasing line 

 

Investigations found that the planned maintenance and inspection regime was inadequate and unclear; 

  During transits the tower was at times kept in operational position which could have allowed excess movement 

of the pin due to reduced load and increased dynamic movement; 

  The design made it difficult to lubricate the pin adequately which may have caused excess friction. 

What went wrong? 

Actions 

  Following  discussions  with  the  manufacturer,  the  vessel  returned  to  port  for  investigation,  and  during  the 
transit to port, Structural Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) of pin connecting parts was undertaken on both legs 
to verify sufficient load capacity and seaworthiness; 

  Adjuster  leg  pin  put  back  in  place  and  increased  diameter  anti-rotation  locking  key  bolts  were  installed  to 

provide additional bolt shear strength, as per manufacturers recommendation;  

  Additional temporary bolt locking mechanisms (Loctite and locking wires) were installed on both adjuster leg 
pins locking key bolts to ensure vibration would not loosen the bolts before the permanent solution was ready; 

  A check was made throughout the tower, of the tightness of all critical bolts and pins; new pin, bushing and 

lubricating lines were installed. 

Longer term actions 

and securing mechanisms; 

critical bolts. 

  Tower to be in survival mode position during all transits according to the manufacturer’s recommendations; 

  Planned maintenance requirements updated and clearly defined for accurate inspection criteria for critical pins 

  Bolt locking mechanisms installed in TLS critical pins (adjusters and TLS pivot) to ensure vibration will not loosen 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Falling object [an object came loose from a mast and fell to deck] 

  High  potential  dropped  object  [an  object  fell  10m  onto  the  main  deck  of  a  vessel  during  pipe  spooling 

  Objects dropped from pipelay tower [bolts vibrated loose, resulting in the shaft being unrestrained and free to 

operations] 

 

vibrate out along with the end cap]. 

 
4  Near Miss: Multiple Potential Dropped Objects Discovered During Loading of Spooling Unit 

What happened? 

A  vessel  loaded  a spooling  unit  and  other  cargo onto  a  platform.    After  lifting  operations  were  completed,  the 
platform reported that multiple potential dropped objects (total 19 items) had been identified on the spooling unit.  
These were mainly loose and unsecured items on the spooler working platform, on its upper level.  The following 
were found, amongst other things: spooler locking pins weighing 7 kg each, securing nuts and bolts, unsecured 
spooler in cradle, unsecured gratings and unattached grating securing chain. 

 

What went wrong? – Investigation and findings 

  Three separate opportunities to check for potential dropped objects were lost.  Work instructions, procedures 

and the requirements of company safety management systems were not followed. 

 

the vendor did not properly check the spooler unit for potential dropped objects before shipment 

  crew on the quayside did not properly check the spooler for potential dropped objects before load out onto 

the vessel.  A specially designed inspection gantry unit was not used 

 

the vessel’s deck crew did not visually check the upper working platform of the spooling unit for any loose 
items  before  lifting  the  load  to  the  platform,  despite  of  direct  requirement  of  vessel  owners  safety 
management system (SMS). 

What lessons were learnt? And what were the actions? 

 

Large and complex objects – such as this spooling unit – should be subject to thorough inspection for potential 
dropped objects at every stage of the transportation process; 

  Do not under-estimate the hazards of loose objects falling from loads from trailers on the road or during loading 

  Crew should be alert at all times to the danger of potential dropped objects and should never be under the 

operations; 

load.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  More than a dropped object – the need for vigilance during cargo operations. 

 

 
5  High Potential Near Miss: Incorrectly Secured Overhead Equipment  

What happened? 

During operations, it was observed that the connecting shackle pins on two 
separate items of overhead equipment (fall arrest inertia reels) were loose 
and could have become detached.  If any of this equipment had fallen it could 
have struck someone underneath with potentially fatal consequences. 

Findings 

 

Inspection  of  the  securing  arrangements  revealed  that  the  wrong 
securing  clips  had  been  used  and  these  had  fallen  out,  enabling  the 
shackle pins to work loose.  A split pin or wire seizing should have been 
used to secure the shackle pin;  

  The  equipment  was  covered  by  weather  protection  boxes  which 

prevented easy inspection of the securing arrangement; 

  This  incorrect  securing  arrangement  was  identified  previously  but 
lessons were  not  shared  across  the  fleet or  with the  contractors  who 
installed this equipment.    

“R” clip type that was incorrectly used 
for  this  application  but  is  commonly 
used in diving operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

Actions 

  Conduct a hazard hunt to confirm that any overhead equipment is secured correctly to prevent it coming loose; 

  Visual check of rigging and securing of any man riding or fall arrest equipment for similar issues; 

  Ensure appropriate regular inspection regimes are in place, particularly for locations where visual inspection is 

difficult – consideration should be given to equipment already positioned at height or concealed from view; 

  Users of fall protection devices may not be able to visually inspect the connections because of location or if 
weather  protection  devices  are  used.    In  these  cases,  additional  or  other  suitable  inspection  arrangements 
should be in place; 

  Care should be taken to confirm the adequacy of the securing arrangements applied when third parties are 

engaged to install, maintain or inspect such equipment.  

Members  may  wish  to  refer  to  the  following  incidents,  both  of  which  relate  to  securing  arrangements  coming 
undone. 

  Near-miss: ROV shackle (potential dropped object); 

  Near-miss: Missing nut and split pin on shackle. 

 

