AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/01 

October 2001 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Dropped Object Risk 

A member has reported finding the ‘job-made’ lifting hook shown below, rough cut from half inch steel plate, during a routine 
safety check at a vendor’s shipyard.  The lifting hook was lying near a pad eye on a lifting frame for a piece of equipment 
about the size of an office desk and estimated to weigh 500-750kg.  The company concerned confiscated the hook and intend 
using it for safety training of new staff, as an example of unsafe practice. 

The lessons learned by the company concerned were: 

  Use only certified lifting gear in good condition; 

 

proper certification is a necessary practice; 

by the rigging supervisor. 

2  Negative Pressure Injury to a Diver 

  Routine inspections of all lifting gear, such as wire rope slings, nylon slings, shackles, hooks, etc. for good condition and 

  All lifting frames for equipment should be fitted with properly certified and suitably rated lifting gear when put in service 

A member has reported this recent incident, concerning negative pressure when breaking containment in subsea pipework. 

During diving operations on a subsea manifold in 140 msw, work was being undertaken to install additional four inch pipe 
spools in a well bay, to enable connection of a well to the manifold.  The spools had been transported to the vessel with 
wooden blind protectors on the flange faces to prevent impact damage.  These did not have pre-drilled vent holes and were 
to be replaced onboard the vessel with standard donut protectors.  However, two assemblies were apparently overlooked 
and were subsequently deployed subsea with the unvented wooden blinds still in place. 

At the time of the incident, the diver had manoeuvred the spool piece close to its final position, removed the tie wrap and 
then attempted to lever the wooden blind off the flange face using his knife.  It appears that the blind then imploded, due to 
the build-up of negative pressure, pulling the diver’s hand through the blind and into the spool, causing a fracture to the arm 
and dislocation of the thumb, bruising and swelling. 

 

out; 

the flange. 

Initial investigations indicate that a number of the existing checks and controls in the company procedures and safe working 
practices failed because they had not been adhered to: 

  The  actions  documented  in  the  project  risk  assessment  to  check  blinds  for  vent  holes  were  not  systematically  closed 

  The assembly was overboarded with the wooden blind in place and this went unnoticed; 

  The diver should not have attempted to lever the blind off the flange face; nor should he have placed himself in front of 

While  this  safety  flash  is  concerned  with  a  negative  pressure  incident,  it  is  important  to  recognise  the  seriousness  of  any 
incident  involving  uncontrolled  pressure  (positive  or  negative)  when  breaking  containment  in  subsea  pipework.  
These incidents inevitably have a high potential for injury and have, in the past, led to diver fatalities. 

3  Serious Incident while Checking Man-Overboard and Buoy Smoke Marker 

A member has informed us of a serious incident that occurred when a person was injured while checking the service date on 
one of the man-overboard and buoy smoke marker units. 

The injured person placed his right hand on top of the smoke marker as located on the vessel’s railings and, as he bent over 
the device, it ignited and the canister burst.  The injured person was struck in the chest, face and hand with burning powder 
and was thrown backwards off his feet by the force of the impact. 

The injuries sustained were:  bruised right hand and small lacerations on the right hand, small burn on the left cheek, small 
burn  on  the  right  hand  and  slight  bruising  to  the  cheek.    The  injured  person  was  wearing  normal  personal  protective 
equipment (PPE), which included flame retardant coveralls and safety glasses, which significantly contributed to protecting him 
from more serious injury. 

The company involved has carried out the following actions as a result of the incident:  the manufacturer has been informed 
and has reviewed the systems employed in the device and cannot determine the cause.  The manufacturer is confident that 
the systems incorporate stringent tests and standards to such devices that they stated that they consider external influences 
contributed to the incident.  These influences have not been determined and dialogue with the manufacturer continues. 

The company involved has instructed its personnel that if anyone needs to check the service details of such equipment, they 
should not lean over or lean on the equipment.  Full PPE should be worn, which includes full face visor over safety glasses. 

4 

Incident as a Result of Failure of a Bollard 

A member has reported the following incident.  A cargo barge loaded with 525 tons was moored to a pipelay barge, when 
one  of  the  bollards  on  the  cargo  barge  broke  and  was  pulled  away  on  the  pipelay  barge’s  deck  by  the  mooring  rope.  
The bollard first hit the lay barge hand rail and then bounced on the deck, where the rigging team leader was working on 
another operation, approximately 10 m from the cargo barge.  The bollard broke his helmet and caused serious injury to the 
right side of the front of his head. 

The weather conditions at the time were:  wind 34 knots, waves 1.5m.  Propylene rope of 64 mm diameter, maximum tensile 
strength (MTS) 46 tons, was being used on the bollard.  The rope did not break, but the 8” diameter 400 mm high bollard 
broke close to the weld on the deck at ~15 mm. 

The following corrective actions have been taken to avoid recurrence of the incident: 

  Reassess the scenario of mooring cargo barge to the lay barge when the weather conditions are bad.  No vessel or cargo 

barges should be moored alongside the lay barge when wind speeds exceed 25 knots; 

  Physical  inspection  of  bollards.    On  investigation,  the  steel  quality  of  the  bollard  in  the  weld  area  was  questioned.  

A qualified third party was to inspect the other bollards for evidence of fatigue and steel hardening. 

5  Failure of Cable Socks (Chinese Fingers) on Subsea Rigging 

We have been passed information on the following incident.  A 2” diameter pipeline dewatering hose had been deployed to 
the seabed, supported at 20 m intervals by cable socks (Chinese fingers) on a winch wire.  The water depth was 380 m. 

 

After a period of several hours it was found that most of the cable socks had moved down the winch wire, causing the full 
weight  of  the  hose  to  be  taken  on  the  cable  socks  above,  which  subsequently  broke.    The  weight  of  the  hose  was  then 
transferred to the slack section of hose on the deck of the deployment vessel.  The dewatering operation was aborted and a 
controlled abandonment of the hose and support rigging onto the vessel was carried out. 

The investigation found that the cable socks were not suitable for this duty: 

  Their design load was much higher than their working load and they did not develop an adequate grip on the winch wire; 

  They were constantly tensioned due to swell heave on the hose and were, therefore, able to relax their bite on the wire; 

  The  use  of  cable  socks  on  a  winch  wire  (a  very  hard  surface  in  comparison  to  a  cable’s  outer  sheath)  was  not 

appropriate. 

The investigation also identified some important system causes into the failure: 

  Although a simulated test on a cable sock was carried out on the deck of the vessel, it wasn’t representational of the 

cyclic loading conditions subsea; 

  The  risk  assessment  process,  although  extensive,  had  not  addressed  this  use  of  cable  socks.    This  rigging  feature  was 

added at a later date and was not adequately risk assessed. 

Subsequently, an alternative method of rigging was developed, employing clamps onto the support wire and the dewatering 
operation was successfully completed. 

6  Medical Device Recall – Defibrillator 

We  have  been  passed  a  recall  notice,  copied  below,  put  out  by  Laerdal  Medical  Ltd  regarding  its  Heartstart  3000  and 
3000QR defibrillators. 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

URGENT:   MEDICAL DEVICE RECALL 

AFFECTED PRODUCT 

Product: Laerdal Heartstart 3000 and Heartstart 3000QR Semi-Automatic Defibrillator 

Manufactured by:  Laerdal Medical As, PO Box 377, N-4001 Stavanger, Norway 

 

REASON FOR RECALL 

Affected  Laerdal  Heartstart  3000  and  Heartstart  3000QR  Defibrillator  may  cease  operation 
and display Service Mandatory NO 9 Transistor Voltage during charging period due to failure 
of a component on the High Voltage Board.  The instance occurs when the unit is subjected to 
the  combination  of  high  humidity  and  high  temperature.    There  is  no  early  indication  or 
warning that the fault has or will occur before the charging for shock delivery.  Laerdal Medical 
AS  have  confirmed  6  such  failures  among  approximately  1400  devices  shipped  since  1998.  
All  these  failures  have  been  in  one  country,  namely  Japan,  during  conditions  of  both  high 
humidity  and  high  temperature:  no  such  failure  has  been  reported  from  any  other  country.  
Nevertheless,  although  this  number  of  failures  is  low  and  restricted  to  one  country,  we  are 
taking this action because there is a potential for additional failures. 

HAZARD INVOLVED 

The clinician would be unable to get the device to function 

The patient would be prevented from receiving therapy 

HOW TO IDENTIFY 

Laedal Heartstart 3000 and Heartstart 3000QR 

  Serial Numbers:  19230-21718 

REQUIRED ACTION 

  You  will  be  receiving  a  call  from  a  Laedal  Medical  representative  within  the  next  4  to  6 
weeks to schedule a repair.  We have identified the correction and are in the process of 
providing new components. 

If  an  effected  unit  is  likely  to  be  used  during  conditions  of  both  high  humidity  and  high 
temperature,  we  recommend  the  affected  unit  is  tested  in  similar  conditions  by  giving  a 
series of three shocks into a tester or other appropriate device. 

If  you  have  questions  about  this  recall  notice,  please  call  your  local  Laerdal  Medical 
company or Laerdal Medical dealer. 

 

 

 

 

 

