AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/16 

Safety Flash 

  May 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This  safety flash  contains three  safety  alerts  informing  members  about  possible  problems with certain  kinds  of 
equipment  and  services.    Members  are  reminded  that  it  is  worthwhile  to  spend  time  and  effort  ensuring  that 
products,  equipment  and  services  are  genuine  and  not  counterfeit,  and  that  they  are  in  good  and  appropriate 
condition for use. 

1  Counterfeit Admiralty Products 

The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO) has issued a warning 
over the dangers posed to the safety of vessels, crews and cargoes by 
counterfeit nautical charts and publications, and has produced a simple 
guide to help identify genuine Admiralty products. 

The  UKHO  has  recently  observed  an  increase  in  the  number  of 
counterfeit  versions  of 
in 
circulation.  John Dawson, Head of Marketing at the UKHO, said: 

its  Admiralty  charts  and  publications 

“The UKHO urges all purchasers, users, inspectors and regulators to be 
vigilant  for  counterfeit  Admiralty  charts  and  publications.    Because 
counterfeit versions have not been through the same rigorous checking 
procedures as official Admiralty charts and publications, they cannot be 
trusted for voyage planning or navigational purposes.  As well as failing 
to comply with SOLAS carriage regulations and possibly also Flag State and Port State Control regulations, the use 
of counterfeit charts and publications poses a serious risk to vessel safety. 

“We are actively seeking to stop the production and sale of counterfeit copies of our charts and publications and 
have  raised  our  concerns  with  the  International  Maritime  Organisation,  the  International  Hydrographic 
Organisation and Flag States.  We also encourage anyone that suspects they may be in possession of counterfeit 
products to get in touch with us.” 

UKHO  has  produced  a  simple  guide  to  help  users  and  inspectors  to  distinguish  official  Admiralty  charts  and 
publications from counterfeit versions.  Official Admiralty charts bear the Admiralty ‘Flying A’ watermark within the 
paper and will carry a ‘thumb label’ strip on the reverse with the Admiralty logo, chart number, geographical area, 
barcode and date. 

Suspect charts and publications can also be identified by comparing them against official Admiralty versions, where 
variations may be spotted in the look, feel and weight of the product, the colour tone and strength of the ink, the 
folds on charts and the height and binding quality of publications. 

 
Anyone  with  suspicions  over  the  authenticity  of  their  Admiralty  charts  and  publications  is  asked  to  contact  the 
UKHO by emailing customerservices@ukho.gov.uk.  Copies of the UKHO’s guide to identifying genuine Admiralty 
products can also be downloaded from http://bit.ly/admiralty-genuine. 

2 

Life Jacket Failures 

IMCA’s attention has been drawn to a number of cases of life jacket failure.  In recent months a contractor found 
that at least seven life jackets had failed for the same reason.  Some of these jackets failed on their first annual test 
and inspection.  The failure was due to a hole in the bladder and the hole is in the same place in each case. 

The manufacturer informed their buyer that the damage was due to pressure applied to the front of the jacket 
when in use.   This was causing the  folded bladder to press up against the  ‘Hammar’  automatic  inflation device 
within the jacket, which in turn was causing damage to the bladder.  The manufacturer is now fitting rubber covers 
to the automatic inflation device. 

Showing location of damage to bladder 

Hammar device without rubber cap 

 

 

With new rubber cap fitted 

 

 
Members are encouraged to carry out a spot check and close examination of all life jackets fitted with automatic 
inflation devices and assess if any damage is occurring.  

Consideration may be given to returning the jackets to a service station and requesting the rubber cap be fitted in 
addition to a service which includes an inflation test. 

3  Product Awareness: Chains for Lifting Harding FF1200 Lifeboat 

Lifeboat manufacturer Harding has published the following bulletin regarding certain lifting chain components used 
for lifeboats of the type FF1200.  During inspection of this lifting equipment, a damaged link was discovered that 
was cracked through. 

Harding  recommends  that  existing  chains  including  links  and  hooks  should  be  carefully  examined.    Further 
information can be found at http://media.sertifiseringsorganet.no/2016/03/Product-Awareness-Notice-4330.pdf.  

 

