SAFETY FLASH 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 21/18 

 

 September 2018 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

Equipment failures 

All the incidents here arise from failure of equipment for one reason or another.  No persons were injured in any 
of these incidents.  Members may wish to look at the risk and hazard of equipment failure, arising from (and not 
limited  to)  the  following  immediate  causes:  poor  or  inadequate  maintenance,  inadequate  parts,  corrosion, 
extremes of temperature, and failure to follow procedures. 

1  Unplanned Deployment of Free Fall Lifeboat 

What happened? 

On a vessel alongside there was an unplanned deployment of a free fall lifeboat (FFB), which no-one was aware of.  
There were  no witnesses to the  inadvertent  launch, which occurred  within a three-hour time window  between 
1500 and 1800 hrs.  

A crew member noticed the boat in the water and investigation began.  Crew boarded the lifeboat and it was found 
that the release hook was still in the locked position and safety pin was in position.  Also, the master link in the 
hook was in good condition.  It was not understood how it could have happened.  The bow of the lifeboat sustained 
damage, coming from collision with a barge moored about 20m behind the vessel.  The barge was undamaged. 

There  had  been  an  inspection  of  the  lifeboat  earlier  in  the  day  but  nothing  unusual  had  been  noticed.    The 
inspection  team  did  not  enter  the  lifeboat  as  the  maintenance  hook  was  disabled,  but  no  unusual  hook 
configuration was noticed. 

The vessel had in recent days come out of dry dock, when there had been an annual inspection of the lifeboat by 
the manufacturer.  That inspection had included a check & test of the boat and the hook.  At the end of the docking 
period, the FFB was placed back on the vessel.  Thereafter, the vessel had a short (calm) sea voyage (1 day) to her 
next port. 

 

 

Normal stowage position  

Location after accidental release 

 

 

Master Link and maintenance 
hook (red painted) after release   

 

 

Lifeboat retrieved back in 

Close up of connection after retrieving back 

Damage to the bow 

cradle 

(maintenance hook applied for security) 

What went wrong? 

What were the causes? 

Investigation  by  both  company  safety  professionals  and  by  the  manufacturer  revealed  no  clear  root  cause  or 
technical defects which might have contributed to the incident.  The lifeboat was four years old and complied with 
all legislation and certification. 

By eliminating the technical failures or human intervention, the only possible explanation is that the master link 
was not properly placed on the release hook, and gradually slipped out of the hook over time. 

What actions were taken? 

  Re-assessment and careful positioning of the master link when replacing the lifeboat; 

  Temporary downgrade of lifeboat safety certificate (fewer POB); 

  Assessment of risk for maintenance (securing) hook to be permanently on the lifeboat when the vessel was at 
sea (there was no objection from Class).  However, it was decided not to do so.  The reason for this was the risk 
following from a more complicated emergency procedure for the crew in emergency was considered too high; 

  The maintenance hook to be used always when in port, or during maintenance at sea. 

Our member is not satisfied with the current root cause and brings this safety incident to the attention of all IMCA 
members. 

2 

Life Raft Self-Activates and Falls to the Quayside 

What happened? 

A life raft self-activated and fell from its cradle from the vessel deck, 8m down onto the barriered quayside bollard 
area.  The weather temperature at the time was 44°C. 

 

 

 

The life raft securing straps, pennant line and life raft station security belts were inspected, and no signs of external 
impact observed.  Investigation identified that the life raft self-inflated following sudden release of gas from the 
gas cylinder.  Further inspection of the cylinder by a third-party showed no damage or corrosion to the bushing disc 
or the circular piece cut; internal inspection of the cylinder found no excessive surface corrosion.  

There were no personnel injuries, and no property damage. 

What were the causes?  

  The gas cylinder was not properly serviced by a third-party service provider; 

 

 

investigation identified that improper torque force was applied to cylinder valve disc bushing 

the disc was not wound back while the cylinder was being filled.  This bent the disc towards the anvil and 
pushed it hard against it.  This could have damaged the disc and then failed as the pressure rises on a hot 
day 

  potential  damage  to  diaphragm  and  overfilling  of  cylinder,  added  to  build-up  of  pressure  due  to  the 

extreme heat over a sustained period, could have led to the diaphragm failure. 

What lessons were learned? 

with at all times; 

  When servicing OEM supplied equipment, manufacturer’s service manual requirements should be complied 

  When making use of third-party providers, ensure that there is proper communication and ensure an effective 

service provision assurance process is implemented. 

Members  may  wish  to  consider  such  issues  as  control  of  sub-contractors  and  third  parties,  in  addition  to  the 
technical cause here relating to equipment failure in extreme heat. 

3  Costly Damage to Azimuth Thruster Caused by Fishing Gear 

What happened? 

A  vessel  equipped  with  two  azimuth  thrusters,  was  performing  operations 
alongside  an  offshore  platform,  when  inappropriate  vibrations  were  noted 
from the starboard azimuth thrusters and its hydraulic pump.   

Investigation revealed the presence of seawater in the thruster oil system.  The 
vessel left the platform using the port engine only and an underwater survey of 
the propellers was carried out on location.  That underwater inspection showed 
rope  and  fishing  nets  fouling  the  starboard  propeller  and  azimuth  unit.    The 
presence of oil around the propeller hub was also noted.  The vessel had to go 
into dry dock, and the thruster assembly, including propeller blades and Kort 
nozzle, had to be removed for repair.   

Repairs cost hundreds of thousands of dollars and the vessel was off hire for 
nearly ninety days. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Rope and fishing net fouling found on the starboard azimuth thruster; 

  The seal was damaged by the fishing net; 

  Seawater presence was observed in the hydraulic system; 

  Reduced lubrication quality of the hydraulic oil caused damage to thruster 

components; 

  Vibrations were noted on the hydraulic pump.  Suction filters were found 

clogged with water and oil residues.  

During the overhaul, additional delays were caused by:  

  Some parts which were not included in initial order for the full overhaul scope; 

  Delay in spares delivery by the manufacturer.  

What lessons were learned? 

The thruster manual states the hydraulic oil should be visually inspected daily; this was arranged by crew, but the 
task was not present in the planned maintenance system (PMS). 

What actions were taken? 

  Crew should check equipment manuals and ensure correct maintenance intervals have been added to the PMS; 

  Manufacturer to study the possibility of installing a net cutter on the propeller shaft; 

 

In  order  to  recognize  water  ingress  caused  by  leakage  quickly,  equipment  to  facilitate  random  chemical 
sampling to determine water content should be installed. 

Members may wish to review the following: 

  Mooring rope fouled the propeller and parted 

  Rope on propeller causing partial loss of propulsion 
 

 

4  Control Module Failure Caused Main Engine Sudden Reduction to Idle Speed 

What happened? 

An offshore support vessel (OSV) was underway to field loaded with cargo when a sudden drop of starboard main 
engine RPM was observed.  The main engine dialog screen gave the error message <invalid throttle signals>.  The 
engineers  informed  the  bridge  immediately.    Investigation  began;  the  onshore  office  and  the  client  were  also 
informed.  With the client, it was decided to take the vessel back into port as a quick fix was not available.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The remote speed controller module had failed;  

  The cause was overheating for a prolonged period; 

  The root cause was assumed to be extremely unfavourable conditions (hot and humid) in the engine room, 

leading to unexpected and unpredictable failures of electronic components because of high temperatures. 

Recommendations 

conditions of heat;   

  Crew  should  remain  aware  of  and  alert  to  the  likelihood  of  unexpected  equipment  failure  under  extreme 

  Sufficient spares of potentially vulnerable electronic items should be carried and stored appropriately.  

Our  member  started  a  fleet-wide  study  of  the  effects  of  high  engine  room  temperatures  on  electronic  control 
equipment. 

5 

Inadequate Maintenance and Securing Arrangements of Emergency Exit Hatches 

What happened? 

The port side emergency exit to deck from the steering gear room failed to open during an inspection by shore-side 
management.    In  addition,  inappropriate  locking  arrangements  (bolt  with  a  nut)  were  found  used  for  various 
emergency exit hatches located on both sides of the main deck. 

 

 

  There were inappropriate locking arrangements for emergency exit hatches – these should not be used.  This 

practice could have led to a potentially hazardous situation where the hatch could not be opened.  

What were the causes? 

What lessons were learned? 

  As  per  company  planned  maintenance  schedule,  the  correct  and  full  operation  of  all  watertight  doors  and 

escape hatches should be checked on a weekly basis; 

  Safety inspections and maintenance of critical equipment should be conducted in an effective manner. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Engine Room Emergency Hatch Damage 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI) and restricted workday case (RWC) following failure of diving bell door system 

