AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/09 

Safety Flash 

August 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety matters  and incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons learned  from  them.    The information  below has been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Pillar Valve Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which a pillar valve from an emergency gas cylinder separated from the bottle while 
under pressure, rapidly releasing 50 cu ft of air to atmosphere and hitting a diver’s helmet.  A trial run dive was planned in an 
anchorage prior to mobilisation to a job site.  Dive checks were carried out as per standard procedures and the diver was 
cleared to enter the dive basket, ready for the water.  As the diver turned upon entering the basket a loud bang was heard 
and there followed an escape of gas.  The diver collapsed to the stage grating and suffered multiple contusions and a dental 
insult.  He was evacuated to shore for further evaluation and treatment but made a full recovery. 

It  was  discovered  subsequently  that  the  bottles  had  been  sent  by  a  subcontractor  to  a  third  party  for  hydrostatic  testing.  
On their  return  the  bottles  were  delivered  to  the  dive  support  vessel.    The  bottles  had  been  charged  to  full  working 
pressure of 2800 psi and had held pressure for several days prior to the incident.  Investigation revealed that the cylinder 
(Luxfur  S50  brand)  had  an  imperial  thread  and  the  pillar  valve  (MDE  232  bar)  which  failed  had  a  metric  thread.    It  is 
considered that the most likely cause of the incident is that the valves were mixed up at the third party testing agency after 
the hydrostatic test. 

The following actions were taken: 

party testing agency; 

  Subcontractor to initiate further investigation and auditing of the receiving, testing and dispatching process at the third 

  Remove from circulation the cylinders from the recent hydrostatic test; test and condemn failed or damaged equipment; 

  Ensure all cylinders and pillar valves held and in use at company sites are of the approved thread combination; 

  Review acceptance criteria for third party hired equipment to ensure quality remains of the highest standard. 

 

 

Diver’s hat with the indentation 

where valve hit the hat 

 

Pillar valve with metric threads 

Imperial threads on the bottle 

 

2  Dropped Object Near-Miss 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  object  was  dropped  whilst  being  lowered  to  divers  on  the  seabed.  
The vessel was working in waters over 100m depth when a stainless steel toolbox was being routinely deployed to divers on 
the seabed.  The deployment of the toolbox was stopped at 98m (the short mark) and the divers were advised to retrieve it.  
However, on arrival at the pennant hook they reported the toolbox missing. 

A search for the toolbox was made using an ROV and it was found on the seabed directly below the initial deployment point, 
from where it was recovered to deck.  No one was injured and no equipment was damaged. 

The incident was immediately reported to the offshore construction manager, who temporarily suspended operations.  Initial 
inspection  of  the  toolbox,  the  deployment  pennant  and  hook  onboard  the  vessel  rigger  did  not  identify  any  defects.  
However, the toolbox had been deployed by attaching it to the crane pennant hook by a section of long link chain bolted to 
the toolbox. 

Investigation revealed that the small diameter long link chain had passed through the wear gap in the hook when the toolbox 
was transiting through the splash zone, allowing the toolbox to drop.  The hook was certified and the wear was within design 
and wear specification limits. 

Toolbox, chain and crane pennant hook 

Detail of small diameter chain used 

 

 

The company noted the following: 

  The incident had the potential to cause serious injury to divers and was reportable to local regulatory authorities; 

  The incident happened during a routine task where ‘custom and practice’ methods were accepted without challenge; 

  The  toolboxes  were  manufactured  in-house  and  not  fabricated  to  any  design  criteria  or  control  processes.    No 

engineering drawings were available; 

 

Important factors not considered during the fabrication of the toolboxes included: 
– 
– 

lifting accessory requirements 
effects of splash zone dynamics; 

  There was no certification or safe working load of the lifting points or chain; 

  The type of long link chain being used was unsuitable for deployment; 

  Laying the chain over the throat of a hook was improper rigging practice; 

  Neither the requirements of an existing risk assessment nor company control processes were complied with; 

  Perception and awareness of the potential risks involved in this task was low: 

failure to recognise the toolbox as a lifting accessory 
failure to recognise that part of the lifting equipment was uncertified, not properly designed or fit for the purpose of 
lifting operations; 

  Worksite safety culture was not fully effective: 

improper rigging practices employed 
deployment method not challenged by rigging team or worksite supervisors. 

– 
– 

– 
– 

 

 

3  Lift Bag Lost When Rigging Parted 

A member has reported an incident in which a lift bag was released to surface upon parting of the rigging attachment point 
straps.  The lift bag was of the open bottomed parachute type.  In order to provide additional buoyancy to a pipeline, two 
five-ton lift bags were secured to the pipe in between pre-installed foam buoys.  The buoys were secured by the traditional 
method of steel straps and bandit clamps.  A ‘strip-out’ wire was in place and was run underneath the straps along the length 
of the pipe to assist removal of the foam buoys once the pipe was in position.  The lift bags were rigged and secured to the 
pipe with appropriately selected and certified rigging.  It was determined that the additional ten tons of lift was not sufficient 
force to cause a loss of control of the pipe.  The inverter line was secured to the pipeline and ‘snugged-up’ to avoid a snatch 
load in the event of failure or an unplanned release of the rigging.  Later, upon up-hauling of the strip-out wire to remove the 
buoys, one of the two bags was found to have parted and was floating on the surface. 

Further inspection revealed that the webbing strops of the bag had been cut through when the strip-out wire was pulled at 
an acute angle across the plane of the pipe relative to the bag.  It was also discovered that the inversion line had pulled the 
attachment  points  away  from  the  crown  of  the  bag.    These  strops  remained  secured  to  the  inverter  line  which  in  turn 
remained attached to the pipeline.  It was further determined that the strops at the top of the bags used for attaching the 
inversion lines were intended for handling purposes only and were not designed as inversion line attachment points. 

The following lessons were drawn from the incident: 

  Dive supervisor should be informed prior to stripping out the flotation buoys when lift-bags are attached to the pipeline; 

  Work plans should be better communicated at toolbox talks and pre-shift meetings; 

  Existing  safety  recommendations  regarding  the  incorrect  use  of  handling  strops  had  not  been  fully  implemented  (see 

item 5 of IMCA safety flash 07/07). 

The company recommended the following: 

  When feasible remove lift bags in advance of potentially conflicting tasks; 

  Re-circulate existing safety recommendations, including IMCA safety flash 07/07; 

  Check identification and marking of dedicated inversion point attachments and lift bags; 

  Amend work instructions to include a reference to the inclusion of purpose-built and labelled inversion line attachment 

points for all future rentals/procurement of this equipment; 

  Consider retrofitting inversion attachment points to bags not currently having this feature. 

Incorrect attachment of inversion line to handling strops 

Sample inversion line attachment points and label 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
5T LIFT-BAG 

ripped 

Inverter 
line 

stripping 
cable  came 
up 
in 
contact 
with  lift-bag 
rigging 

Schematic diagram of pipeline and lift bags illustrating incident 

