AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/00 

October 2000 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Transponder/Beacon Explosion 

A member has reported on an incident which occurred when a mini transponder/beacon exploded, injuring an employee in 
the face.  The injury was caused by the end piece of the transponder being blown off. 

The transponder, Applied Acoustic model 919 mini beacon, exploded when it was activated after being charged.  The charger 
used was an Applied Acoustic model 982 smart charger. 

The contractor involved has been in contact with the equipment manufacturer, who advised that these transponders should 
be dismantled/ depressurised until the reason for the explosion had been identified. 

The  manufacturer,  Applied  Acoustic  Engineer,  has  proposed  the  attached  procedure  (Annex  1)  on  how  to 
dismantle/depressurise the mini transponders/beacons in a safe manner. 

Once the transponders have been depressurised there is no danger of an explosion. 

2  Personnel Lifting System Fatality 

We  have  learned  of  a  fatality  when  a  worker  fell  from  a  full  body  harness 
boatswain’s  chair  when  ascending  on  a  hoisting  system.    The  initial  information 
from  the  investigation  team  indicates  that  the  individual  fell  when  he  became 
detached  from  the  self-locked  grip  latch  hook,  similar  to  that  depicted  below.  
The latch on the hook depicted on the right opens outward. 

The company involved has implemented a survey of all personnel hoisting and fall 
arrest systems seeking: 

  verification  that  all  hook  components  are  designed  and  manufactured  and 

  where such hooks are used, these should be self-locking and self-closing with 

certified for lifting personnel; 

an inward moving latch. 

Examples of such hooks are shown overleaf. 

 

 

 

 

3  Serious Fire Extinguisher Alert 

We have received a report of a fatality whilst using a fire extinguisher.  A worker was using a fire extinguisher to put out a 
small  fire  when  the  extinguisher  suddenly  exploded,  resulting  in  the  person’s  death  from  the  flying  debris.    Part  of  the 
extinguisher cracked open when the internal CO2 cylinder opened (225 psi/17 bar), hitting the user in the chest. 

The cause of the incident was corrosion of the cylinder under the rubber protective foot.  Water had entered the rubber 
lining, causing serious corrosion. 

We understand that the vendor has distributed a warning to all owners of this type of fire extinguisher stating that the annual 
inspection should include visual inspection of the bottom of the cylinder after the rubber foot has been removed.  Please see 
the photographs below: 

 

 

 

4  Hydraulic Injury to Hand 

Work was being undertaken servicing an engine.  Immediately prior to the accident the first cylinder head had been removed 
using the equipment and procedures normally used for this task.  The hydraulic power tool for tensioning the main retaining 
bolts (regulated at 500 bar) was applied and pressured up to 490 bar.  The injured person’s left hand was on the body of the 
jack.  As he slackened the main nut on the tensioned bolt a small release of HP oil was injected into his left hand. 

The cause of the release was the failure of an HP seal on the hydraulic jack that allowed a high velocity discharge of a small 
quantity of hydraulic oil to be released through a small aperture.  The failure was attributed to a missing backup ‘o’-ring seal.  
Even though the injured person was wearing PPE, the jet of oil penetrated his left hand. 

 

 

 

The reason for the missing backup ‘o’-ring could not be established.  It was either omitted by the manufacturer or during 
maintenance.  The risk assessment that was carried out did not identify that high pressure could be contained within the jack. 

The company involved has identified the following: 

the need for a specific procedure regarding the changing of seal/’o’-ring assemblies; 

investigation and availability of gloves that provide additional protection against equipment that may involve high pressure 
hazards; 

  hydraulic jacks should be included on planned maintenance system; 

  additional PPE (full face visors) to be worn while performing this task in future. 

Note: 

Procedure 

Note 

 

 

1) 

2) 

3) 

4) 

5) 

6) 

7) 

8) 

Annex 1 

Dismantling/Depressurising Procedure for AAE 91x  ‘Mini’-Beacons 

Introduction 

This note covers the following models: 919, 916, 915, 915H.  All references to a ‘beacon’ include these four models. 

To ensure that there can be no possibility of pressure build up inside one of the above models, or to relieve any possible 
pressure build up, the following procedure should be followed. 

Please read this whole procedure and ensure that it is fully understood prior to undertaking any action. 

The  aim  of  this  procedure  is  to  remove  the  lower  (connector)  end-cap,  thus  relieving  any  possible  internal  pressure  and 
allowing any unwanted gasses to disperse. 

In  the  event  of  misuse  or  an  unforeseen  circumstance,  there  may  be  the  potential  for  pressure  to  be  built  up  inside  the 
beacon because of heat or by venting of the battery pack. However unlikely, we will therefore assume that, for the purposes 
of this procedure, the beacon is: 1) Pressurised and 2) That the gasses may be ignited by a flame or spark.  

The beacon should be removed to a place free of electrical apparatus where the beacons can be disassembled. 

In order to contain any possible rapid pressure relief, precautions should be taken to minimise the effect of any rapid 
ejection of one or other end-cap. 

If any safety clothing or shatter proof mask is available, it should be worn. It is advisable that hand protection be worn 
when unscrewing the main securing screw. 

There is a possibility that a small amount of pressure will be inside the beacon simply due to the change in the volume of air 
as the temperature changes. For example if a beacon is assembled in a cold environment and it is subsequently taken to a 
warm room a small amount of pressure will exist. This very small amount of pressure is entirely normal and will be of no 
consequence or significance whatsoever. 

To avoid the possibility of creating a spark inside the unit, the beacon should NOT be switched on. 

The beacon should not point to any person or object which might be hurt or damaged from one or both of the end-
caps of the beacon being expelled at high speed. 

The central securing screw which is located on the lower (connector) end-cap should be unscrewed 2 or 3 times at 
which  time  it  should  be  checked  that  the  LOWER  end-cap  is  being  driven  away  from  the  beacon  tube  (cylindrical 
pressure  housing)  and  that  the  transducer  TOP  end-cap  remains  close  to  the  tube.  The  transducer  TOP  end-cap 
should be pushed onto the tube at this time if it has been seen to come away.  

The LOWER end-cap securing screw man now be undone further. After a total of around 16 turns, the LOWER end-
cap will have been driven away from the tube sufficiently for the two O rings to be free of the tube, thus allowing any 
pressure to escape.  

The LOWER end-cap securing screw may now be unscrewed completely (about 7 - 8 turns) and the LOWER end-cap 
withdrawn from the body tube by a few centimetres. The LOWER end-cap is connected to the electronics inside the 
remaining  beacon  body  by  a  grey  ribbon  cable  which  may  now  be  disconnected  from  the  LOWER  end-cap  circuit 
board. 

Note 

We would also suggest that the ribbon cable be pulled away from the circuit board inside the tube of the beacon so that 
there is no potential for this cable to be damaged whilst connected to the electronics and  battery pack inside the beacon. 

Safety Flash 

 

9) 

The beacon has now been separated thereby completely eliminating the possibility of any pressure build up inside the 
unit. Furthermore, any unwanted gasses are now free to disperse.  These gasses, if present at all, are sufficiently small in 
volume that we do not suggest the need for any room ventilation. 

The three beacon parts; Lower end-cap, main body and ribbon cable, can now be packed or stored as required. 

Finally, it should be noted that, historically, hundreds of these beacons have been manufactured and used extensively in the 
field. This procedure has been written after just one beacon caused injury for reasons we do not yet know. As stated above, 
the chances of any operator experiencing a problem are very small, but until the cause of the problem is known, the above 
procedure should be followed to ensure the utmost safety. 

APPLIED ACOUSTIC ENGINEERING LTD 

