Safety Flash 

April 2018 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1 

Incorrectly Selected Oxygen Welding Gas Hose Bursts & Catches Fire 

What happened? 

The ship’s welder opened the Oxygen and Acetylene gas bottle 
valves  in order  to  do  a  cutting  job  on  deck.    These gas  bottles 
were  attached  to  the  vessel’s  integrated  welding  gas  system.  
Opening the valve on the Oxygen bottle had the immediate effect 
of causing an explosion to a short, high pressure hose delivering 
oxygen from the bottle to the oxygen gas regulator.  The end of 
the hose caught fire and was quickly extinguished by turning off 
the oxygen bottle.  Nobody was injured and the only damage was 
to the hose that completely separated. 

What went wrong? 

Investigation found the following: 

  The hose had been recently replaced, but the replacement 
hose  was  a  hydraulic  oil  service  hose  with  oxygen  fittings.  
The replacement hose was not compliant with the ISO 14113 
specification  required  by  the  manufacturer,  although  the 
pressure rating was suitable; 

  The non-compliant hose was supplied from a non-preferred 
supplier  (the  required  hose  length  was  not  available  from 
original supplier); 

  The onboard team did not adequately check that the hose 

was of the correct specification. 

What was the cause? 

Based on detailed investigation into a similar incident, it was suggested that the cause of the incident was due to 
adiabatic compression heating within the hose which caused the inner lining to auto-ignite due to residual oil within 
the hose.  Our member notes that there are numerous incidents recorded by industry due to this issue. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Welding hoses should be compliant with ISO 14113.  For oxygen hoses, the material should have an auto-ignition 
temperature suitable for the service (typically > 400⁰), and cleaned for oxygen service.  

  Do not assume that because a hose is sufficiently pressure rated it is fit for a specific purpose.  

 

 

 
  Always ensure correct specification hoses are ordered and received. 

IMCA notes that in order to avoid adiabatic compression: 

  Use only original equipment and spares when handling/servicing oxygen equipment; 

  Work clean – no oil or any other hydrocarbon impurities must contaminate the parts (your hands, tools etc.); 

  Open oxygen cylinder top valves slowly. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Oxygen and Acetylene hose caught fire 

  Proper care of Oxy-Acetylene cutting and welding equipment 

2 

Edges and Ledges – A Slip on Deck Resulted in Injury  

What happened 

A crewman slipped on a step grating and twisted his ankle.  The incident happened as he stepped through a hatch 
on his way to a job.  Initially he did not feel any pain, so he did not report the incident and continued work.  However, 
as time passed, the pain increased and after three hours he reported the event to the officer on watch (OOW).  The 
OOW contacted the client’s medical service, who provided an ambulance and evacuated the injured person from 
the vessel to the clinic.  The injured person was assessed at the clinic in the middle of the night, and  the vessel 
informed the office the next morning.  Investigation highlighted the fact that client’s medics reported the incident 
to the company before the vessel. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  With regard to reporting: 

the injured person did not follow company procedures and immediately report the incident to the OOW 

the vessel management did not inform the designated person ashore when the incident occurred – again, 
not following company procedures; 

 

  With regard to the slip/trip: 

lack of hazard identification will have been a contributing factor 

the incident is still under investigation. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Discuss the lessons learnt with all crew members, particularly the requirement to report incidents immediately; 

  Consider efforts to identify the need to mark steps, especially when there is no colour contrast; 

  The  company  has  a  permanent  “Edges  and  Ledges” campaign  to  identify  all edges  and  ledges  and mark  all 

 

 

 

 

hazards.  

 

Members may also wish to make further use of the IMCA promotional material on this topic: 

 
Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Slips, trips and falls – raising awareness 

  Recent slips, trips and falls involving stairs 

  Preventing slips and trips (pocket card) 

  Preventing slips, trips and falls (poster) 

 

Look where you are going (poster) 

  Take care on the stairs (poster) 

 

 

 

 
3  Vessel Ran Aground Following Error on Chart 

What happened 

A vessel ran aground whilst leaving a channel on the approach to a port.  The vessel was making around 4.5 knots, 
and grounded by the stern in the right side of the channel.  At the moment of grounding, the echo sounder was 
indicating a depth of 3.5 metres.  Whilst leaving the channel, 
the vessel caught a small sand hill that had not been charted.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

During  the  investigation  process,  the  channel  navigational 
chart  was  carefully  checked  and  errors were  found.   There 
were also indications that a buoy had shifted 5m due to the 
length of the chain anchoring the buoy. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Closer  control  of the  water  depth  indication  and  echo-
sounder information was required.  Officers need to be 
more aware of the location and accuracy of the vessel’s 
fitted echo-sounder and its limitations in shallow water; 

be marked on charts.  

What actions were taken? 

  Suspected errors in navigational marks should be reported to Port Authorities, and any changes reported should 

  Management were to approach the appropriate authorities with the findings from the company investigation 
and  communicate  updates  to  relevant  vessels.    The  responsible  authorities  were  to  update  the  channel 
navigation chart and consider adjusting the length of the chain on the buoy; 

  Ensure that deck officers are fully aware of the importance of constantly monitoring the vessel’s draft and echo 

sounder whilst passing through a channel; 

  Passage planning should be from berth to berth.  When making any passage plan, it is of absolute necessity to 
ensure  there  is  safe  navigable  water  throughout  the  route  to  be  taken.    Any  areas  of  concern  should  be 
indicated on the chart so that all officers of the watch are aware of any potential issues. 

Two tugs were provided to recover the vessel from the grounding.  The Captain and Chief Engineer conducted a 
visual inspection of the hull and several internal compartments to confirm that the vessel’s seaworthiness was not 
affected.    A  diving  inspection  was  carried  out  and  confirmed  that  around  two  square  metres  of  coating  were 
affected, but there was no severe damage to the hull. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident from the UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB): 

  Grounding and flooding of ferry – complacency 
 

 

 

 
4  Vessel Made Contact with Rig Legs 

What happened? 

A vessel came  into contact  with the  legs of a rig  –  however, there was  no damage  to the vessel.  The incident 
occurred  when  the  vessel  was  moving  astern  down  the 
prevailing current, to approach the starboard side of the rig.  
Because the cargo was located on the vessel’s forward deck, 
the vessel had to approach within two meters of the rig in 
order to allow the hook to reach the load.  When the vessel 
reached her offload/snatch position below the crane’s hook, 
the vessel’s bow turned slightly to port, which allowed the 
current  to  catch  the  vessel’s  starboard  side.    The  Master 
observed the vessel drifting towards the rig’s starboard side 
aft leg and he immediately decided to abort the operation.  
The vessel was  manoeuvred  forward  with both engines  to 
escape; unfortunately, the port quarter slightly touched the 
rig’s starboard side aft leg.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

The findings noted were as follows: 

  The  Master  permitted  the  operation  to take  place on  the  starboard or  weather  side  of  the  rig and  did  not 

request to have the work done from the rig’s port or lee side; 

  The effect of wind and current played a vital role in vessel’s approach to and hitting the rig’s leg; 

  The Master’s decision to approach was not properly risk assessed – he misjudged the direction and effect of 

the current during manoeuvring; 

 

It was not evident that the lifting operation was covered in a specific risk assessment for that particular project; 

  The Master had no robust plan for escape manoeuvring and did not plan when to abort manoeuvring. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  A better understanding was needed of the risks and hazards of manoeuvring against the current; 

  A  more  detailed  prior  agreement  should  have  been  made  between  the  vessel  Master  and  the  offshore 

installation manager (OIM) with regard to cargo and lifting operations; 

  Escape routes and plans should be considered before starting any critical manoeuvring; 

  The vessel Master – rather than the OIM or the client – has the overriding authority to accept or reject the 

operation based on judgment about the weather limitations and circumstances. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Vessel activities near platforms – two incidents 

  Property damage: platform supply vessel collided with legs of jack-up rig 

5  Corrosion Cracking of Strain-Hardened Type 304 Stainless Steel Bolts 

What happened? 

The  International  Association  of  Oil  &  Gas  Producers  (IOGP)  has  published  Safety  Alert  #297  relating  to  the 
unexpected failure of certain kinds of strain-hardened Type 304 stainless steel bolts, (ASTM A193 B8, Class 2).  The 
failure occurred at an offshore facility during a pneumatic leak test of gas piping exiting a test separator.  The bolts 
that failed were operating at temperatures below 50°C.  The failure has been attributed to chloride-induced stress 
corrosion cracking (CISCC). 

 

 
The IOGP notes that: 

“strain-hardening  austenitic  stainless-steel  nuts  and bolts  to  increase 
their strength may increase their sensitivity to CISCC and reduce their 
safe  upper  temperature  limit.  Other  factors  such  as  aggressive 
environments (e.g. offshore and coastal facilities and areas exposed to 
wet  deluge  testing)  and  increased  stress/strain  may  also  increase 
susceptibility to CISCC.”  

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

The  IOGP’s  intent  in  sharing  this  is  to  help  mitigate  the  risk  of  such 
failures occurring elsewhere in new or existing facilities.  The following 
corrective actions and recommendations were made: 

  Consider undertaking a desktop review to identify the number and 
location  of  Type  304/304L(B8)  stainless  steel  nuts  and  bolts 
exposed to the marine environment; 

  Consider  conducting  a  visual  survey  to  confirm  the  number  and 

location of the nuts and bolts identified through the desktop review;  

  Consider developing a prioritized plan to replace the nuts and bolts identified above with suitable nuts and 

bolts; 

  Consider arranging for the disposal of all Type 304/304L nuts and bolts held in storage, both on site and off site. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Near miss: corrosion caused crane boom failure during heavy lifting 

 

Load chain failure owing to corrosion 

 

