Safety Flash 

March 2018 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1 

Sustained  Load  Cracking  in  Aluminium  Manufactured  from  Aluminium  Alloys  HE30/AA6082  and 
AA6351 

A  susceptibility  to  sustained  load  cracking  (SLC)  has  been  identified  in  cylinders  manufactured  from  aluminium 
alloys of specific grades, manufactured between 1963 and 1995. Sustained load cracking is a metallurgical anomaly 
occurring in cylinders that have remained pressurised for sustained periods of time. 

WorkSafe New Zealand Safety Alert 

There have been two recent incidents of serious harm in the Asia-Pacific region caused by the catastrophic failure 
of self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA) cylinders manufactured from aluminium alloy 6351.  As 
a result of these incidents in August 2017 WorkSafe New Zealand issued a Safety Alert entitled “Cylinder design 
approvals withdrawn”.  This Safety Alert may be accessed at: 

https://worksafe.govt.nz/about-us/news-and-media/cylinder-design-approvals-withdrawn/  

In its Safety Alert WorkSafe New Zealand announced that it had decided to withdraw approval for SCUBA and self-
contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) cylinder designs which used aluminium alloy 6351.  The withdrawal came 
into effect from 31 October 2017. 

UK Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Safety Bulletin 

On 8 March 2018 the UK HSE issued Safety Bulletin ED 1-2018 entitled “Cylinders manufactured from aluminium 
alloys HE30/AA6082 and AA6351 and used primarily for gases for underwater breathing apparatus”. 

The publication of this bulletin was prompted in part by the Asia-Pacific incidents, but also by an incident of serious 
harm caused by the failure of an HE30/AA6082 cylinder in England in 2017. 

HSE Safety Bulletin ED 1-2018 may be accessed at: 

http://www.hse.gov.uk/safetybulletins/aluminium-cylinders.htm 

The UK HSE bulletin states the following: 
 

These cylinders should only be used if they have undergone thorough visual inspection and testing with an eddy-
current device by a competent inspector (see inspection and testing requirements below).  

Failure to conduct such inspection and testing could result in serious harm. 

Cylinders  to  be  inspected  and  tested  include  those  used  for  SCUBA  diving,  those  that  supply  breathing  air 
through an umbilical hose and those used to fill SCUBA cylinders. 

 

 

If you are unable to determine whether a particular cylinder is made from one of these alloys, remove it from 
service, safely release the gas and do not use it until the alloy can be identified and proper inspection and testing 
can be conducted. 

  Cylinders that cannot be identified from markings on the cylinder must be removed from service, condemned 

and rendered incapable of holding pressure. 

  Cylinders that fail visual inspection or eddy-current testing must be condemned and rendered incapable of 

holding pressure. 

IMCA Guidance to Members 

In view of the information provided by the Worksafe New Zealand alert and the UK HSE bulletin, IMCA recommends 
that cylinders manufactured from aluminium alloys HE30/AA6082 and AA6351 are not used on member worksites. 

Members are advised to take the following actions: 

1.  Check if any cylinders are manufactured or suspected to be manufactured from aluminium alloys HE30/AA6082 

or AA6351.  

2.  Check  for  specific  alloy-related  markings  or  for  a  date  of  manufacture  (the  earliest  date  stamped  on  the 
cylinder) prior to 1995. If there is reason to believe that a cylinder may be made from either of these alloys, 
then the cylinder should be removed from service.  The gas should be safely released, the cylinder rendered 
incapable of holding pressure, and safely disposed of. 

3. 

If it is not possible to determine the alloy and appropriate information, e.g. if the cylinder markings are missing 
or cannot easily be read, then the cylinder should be removed from service.  The gas should be safely released, 
the cylinder rendered incapable of holding pressure, and safely disposed of. 

Identification of Affected Cylinders 

The WorkSafe New Zealand Safety Alert contains a list of cylinders affected by the withdrawal of WorkSafe cylinder 
design approvals.  This has been reproduced overleaf as a means of assisting members to identify affected cylinders. 

The  UK  HSE  Safety  Bulletin  contains  the  following  guidance  on  identifying  cylinders  manufactured  from 
HE30/AA6082 and AA6351 aluminium alloys. 
 

Cylinders stamped with any of the following markings are manufactured from HE30/AA6082 or AA6351:  

  HE30  

  HOAL 1  

  HOAL 2  

  HOAL 3  

  HOAL 4  

  BS5045/3/B  

  BS5045/3/B/S  

  AA6351  

  P****X (as part of serial number)  

  P****P (as part of serial number)  

Note: On some small cylinders manufactured at Luxfer’s Aldridge, England, plant, the above markings may not 
be present. In that case, the alloy can be determined from the three-digit type number stamped around the 
base. If the three-digit number is of the form 1**, 3** or 5**, then the alloy of manufacture is AA6351. 

 

 

 

 
List of Cylinders Affected by the Withdrawal of WorkSafe New Zealand Approval 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2 

Technical Service Bulletin from Broco/Rankin – BR22 Plus Exothermic Cutting Torch 

The Association of Diving Contractors International (ADCI) has circulated an updated Technical Service Bulletin from 
Broco/Rankin relating to the BR22 Plus Exothermic Cutting Torch.  This was sent out by Broco/Rankin on 13 March 
2018.  

The bulletin, available here, notes that “a recent report of an external oxygen leak from the control valve of a BR22 
PLUS prompted an investigation to determine root cause.  The result of that investigation concluded that machining 
debris in the O-ring groove of the Control Valve Nut has interfered with the Oxygen seal in the valve assembly”. 

Members using this equipment should download and read the bulletin, and take the actions recommended therein. 

Leak Test Procedure 

This picture shows what a BR22 PLUS torch looks like 
and the location of the valve stem leak. If this is not 

Outfit the BR22 PLUS torch as shown with an 18” 

cutting rod inserted and the collet tightened 

 

 

what your torch looks like, do not continue! 

 

 

