AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/06 

July 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near-Miss Involving Hyfex Fire Extinguisher Refill Kits 

IMCA has received the attached Divex HSE alert, which members should be aware of. 

2  Fatal Accident with Lifting Appliance 

IMCA  has  received  a  reports  on  a  fatal  incident  during  a  lifting  operation.    A  provisions  crane  was  loading  pallets  onto  a 
vessel using a pallet fork.  After landing a pallet on the deck, the pallet fork was pulled clear and the crane operator moved 
the crane outward to pick up the next load.  During this operation, the crane winch wire snapped.  The pallet fork fell onto 
the deck, landing on a member of the crew, who subsequently died of his injuries. 

Sketch of lifting equipment 

 

The company noted the following causes to the incident: 

  a malfunctioning or missing ‘upper limit switch’; 

 

the wire end at the hook side was terminated by means of three incorrectly-applied U-bolt clamps instead of a ferrule 
and swage (see figures overleaf). 

The following lessons were drawn from the incident: 

  Limit switches are important safety equipment that should be tested regularly to confirm their proper operation 

 

  Winch wire end terminations should be correctly performed.   

  Cranes should be inspected before lifting operations, using an approved check-list 

  Procedures  should  be  established  to  ensure  personnel  are  properly  informed  of  the  hazards  involved  in  crane 

operations, and do not stand underneath loads 

Safety Flash 

Incorrect method of attaching clamps to winch wires.  

 

Example of a correctly prepared ferrule lock.  

Other techniques acceptable to classification societies  

and/or the crane manufacturer may be used. 

 

3  Small Fire Caused by Toaster in Mess Room 

IMCA has received a report on a small fire which occurred in the mess room of a production platform. 

A plastic tray had been left on top of a conveyor toaster.  A member of the crew entered the mess room, plugged in and 
turned on the toaster.  The tray was not taken off of the top of the toaster.  The person then left the mess room without 
turning off the toaster.  Subsequently the plastic tray holding the bread melted and caught fire. 

The fire was successfully extinguished with a dry powder extinguisher and there were no injuries. 

The following lessons were drawn from the incident: 

  Ensure that no items are placed on top of this type of toaster even when not in use; 

  Consider the use of guards and/or signs; 

 

  When this type of toaster is in use, the user should remain in attendance and switch it off before leaving; 

  Consider the suitability of certain types of toaster for a given location; 

  Crew should be reminded about the need for basic safety awareness even when engaged in everyday domestic tasks. 

DIVEX HSE ALERT 

 
 
HSE Alert No. HSE001-2006
 
 
 
 
Hyfex Fire Extinguisher Refill Kits 
 
Part No’s SE4816 and SE4817 
 
 
 
 
DATE 
 
 

 
COUNTRY: 

 
05/05/06 

 
EGYPT 

  

 

Divex Ltd. 
Enterprise Drive 
Westhill, Aberdeen 
AB32 6TQ, United Kingdom 

Telephone  +44 (0)1224 740145 
Facsimile   +44 (0)1224 740172 
e-mail  

info@divex.co.uk 

 
LOCATION: 

 
DECOMPRESSION CHAMBER 

 

DESCRIPTION 
An  installed  Hyfex  Hyperbaric  Fire  Extinguisher  has  recently  catastrophically  ruptured  inside  a 
decompression chamber.  Fortunately no personnel were injured as a result of the incident and only minor 
damage  occurred  to  the  interior  of  the  decompression  chamber.    The  photographs  below  indicate  the 
potential severity of the failure: 
 

 

 

 
 
INVESTIGATION FINDINGS 
Investigation has revealed that the interior wall of the fire extinguisher was badly corroded, in places the 
wall  thickness  was  only  approximately  2mm  thick.    Typically  wall  thickness  should  be  approximately 
4.2mm and 6.3mm thick based on the type of cylinder. 
 
The users’ contract for maintenance had recently been awarded to a local service company in the country 
of operation and the maintenance and servicing process was not carried out as per Divex requirements.  It 
was obvious that the Servicing Company did not fully understand what was required of them. 
 
The contents of the ruptured extinguisher seem to indicate that the wrong type of foaming agent has been 
used  and  that  it  has  had  a  significant  influence  on  the  high  levels  of  corrosion.    Initial  appearances  are 
that a “protein based” foam agent such as “bulls blood” with a high level of iron content may have been 
used.  This is difficult to quantify at present.   
 
 
LESSONS LEARNED 
•  Servicing and tests were not carried out as per Divex requirements; 
•  Divex refill packs were not used in performing refill process; 
•  The  sub-contractors  were  not  fully  aware  of  technical  requirements  and  did  not  hold  the  necessary 

 

factory / manufacturers training and qualifications; 

•  Had divers been inside the chamber at the time there would have been a high potential for people to 

be injured. 

 

Rev 1 

Page 1 of 2

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTION 
•  Divex  have  performed  an  incident  investigation,  including  discussions  with  the  Diving  Company 

 

involved; 
Informed IMCA of our intention to issue an HSE Alert to the industry; 

• 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
•  Clients  (users)  need  to  refill  Hyfex  Extinguishers  with  Divex  AFFF  Refill  Packs  (SE4816  (3Ltr)  and 

 

SE4817 (7.5 Ltr); 

•  Users  must  ensure  their  sub-contractors  are  fully  aware  of  technical  requirements  and  hold  the 

necessary factory / manufacturers training. 
Issue Divex HSE Alert to all trade associations (e.g. IMCA, ADC (UK) and ADC (USA); 
Issue Divex HSE Alert to all known purchasers of Divex Hyfex Extinguishers; 

• 
• 
•  Distribute Divex HSE Alert to all Divex locations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
NAME: 

 
 
Kevin Smith 

 
 
JOB TITLE:

 
 
General Manager - QHSE 

 
 
DATE: 

 
 
05/07/06 

 
  for and on behalf of Divex Ltd. 

Rev 1 

Page 2 of 2

