AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 26/16 

Safety Flash 

 October 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus – Stored Energy/Trapped Pressure 

This safety flash has two incidents, both of which relate to stored energy.  The first deals with a release of trapped 
pressure from part of the tooling frame of an ROV.  The second is an update from the International Association of 
Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP) containing further findings from an incident published earlier in 2016, relating to a small 
plug ejected from a pressurised pipeline.  

1  Near Miss: Release of Trapped Pressure After ROV Dive 

A member has reported an incident in which there was an unplanned release of trapped pressure from part of the 
tooling frame under an ROV.  The incident occurred when it was noted that the frame was not deploying correctly 
and was slightly twisted.  Upon investigation the coil mounting frame had been fitted upside down.  The crew began 
to remove the cross member using an Allen key to separate the frame into two sections for removal and to ease 
the handling during the turning over portion of the task. 

Upon  the  first  quarter  turn  of  the  port  side  Allen  bolt,  a  hissing  noise  was  heard.    The  supervisor  immediately 
evacuated the area and had it barriered off. 

Frame cross member containing 
trapped pressure 

Note Marking  stencil  “STBD” 
above Allen bolt  

 

Allen  bolt  being  removed 
when incident  occurred (this 
image displays the starboard 
side bolt) 

The  system  was  left  to  bleed  down  naturally.    The  risks  of  the  job  were  re-assessed  and  additional  personal 
protective equipment (PPE) was identified for further work in removing the frame. 

 

Causal factors: 

  The frame was manufactured on the vessel; 

  An  engineering  solution  was  identified  to  prevent  possibility  of  trapped  pressure  –  holes  drilled  in  cross 

 
  The potential for trapped pressure had not been identified; 

  The frame had been incorrectly fitted. 

The following actions were taken: 

member; 

  Safety flash issued; 

  Other similar systems checked and modified as required; 

  Clear markings applied to ensure correct frame orientation. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

IMCA SF 07/14 – Incident 1 – First aid injury: thermos cup exploded after being in hyperbaric environment. 

2 

Failure of Threads – Follow up to “Corrosion Coupon Plug Ejected from Pressurised Pipeline” 

The IOGP published safety alert number 273 in May 2016, regarding an incident in which a corrosion coupon plug 
was ejected from a pressurised pipeline.  This was passed on to IMCA members as IMCA SF 18/16 – Incident 3 – 
Stored pressure: corrosion coupon plug ejected from pressurised pipeline. 

This forms a follow up to the previous alert and is part of a summary of the main lessons learned, relating to the 
wearing of threads on bolts. 

What Went Wrong? 

  The threads of the access fitting were worn down to such an extent, that they were unable to restrain the plug 

upon minor disturbance (the ¼ turn of the plug); 

  The access fitting was installed during pipeline construction in 1987.  It is estimated to have been subject to 

  Bottom-of-pipeline debris can cause galling of threads on stainless steel plugs, which in turn can damage the 

over 140 retrieval and installation cycles; 

threads of carbon steel access fittings; 

  The  Original  Equipment  Manufacturer  (OEM)  supplied  thread  tapping  assembly  service  tool  had  been  used 
routinely for every plug coupon retrieval and installation cycle without the use of flushing oil to remove debris 
from the threads; 

 

In  the  presence  of  bottom-of-pipeline  debris  and  thread  damage,  the  repetitive  removal of  internal  thread 
material  can  lead  to  ever  smaller  contact  surfaces,  increasing  contact  stress,  increasing  wear  rates  and/or 
galling; 

  Smaller thread contact surfaces reduce the ability of the access fittings to restrain the plug; 

  Absence  of  a  tool  to  determine  the  internal  thread  condition  under  pressurised  conditions  meant  that  the 

internal thread condition was unknown. 

The main lessons learnt were summarised thus: 

  Threaded access fittings, which are subject to frequent use of a thread tapping assembly service tool (used to 
clean internal threads from debris and galling damage) can suffer from reducing thread contact surfaces.  This 
mechanism was previously not identified; 

  The internal thread condition was neither confirmed after each use of a thread tapping tool nor periodically 

verified because this was an unknown degradation mechanism. 

The full report can be found on the IOGP’s website here. 

