AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/05 

November 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Engine  Room  Fires  –  Appropriate  Use  of  Insulating  Material  on  Hot  Surfaces  –  Feedback 

following IMCA Safety Flash 10/05 item 2 

Safety flash 10/05 reported on a recent engine room fire.  It was noted in that safety flash that the probable cause of the fire 
was  spraying  of  leaking  hydraulic  oil  onto  an  improperly  insulated  exhaust  flange.    (NB  SOLAS  regulations  require  proper 
insulation of all surfaces with temperatures above 220°C.) 

A member has provided some useful feedback on the incident report, set out below for further information: 

  Covering  every  hot  surface  with  lagging  could  increase  the  risk  of  fire  if  done  so  without  using  suitable  insulation 

  The use of soft or absorbent lagging can create further potential risk, since oil sprayed onto absorbent or soft lagging on 

material; 

a hot exhaust can eventually ignite; 

  A small leak might dribble unnoticed onto soft or absorbent lagging until there is enough oil in close proximity to the hot 

exhaust to cause a fire.  This can be an issue with certain widely used makes of engine; 

  Oil resistant laggings are commercially available.  Whilst these are not perfect, they do afford some protection from oil 

spray or leaks.  These oil-resistant lagging types have a silver facing to protect against flammable liquids. 

2  Near-Miss During Diving Operations 

IMCA has been advised of a near-miss during diving operations involving the cam lock on a KMB17 divers helmet.  The diver 
entered the water and stopped at a depth of 3 metres to begin safety system checks, after which he continued his descent. 
At  8m,  the  diving  superintendent  heard  a  water  gurgling  sound  from  the  diver  and  asked  him  if  he  was  experiencing  any 
problems.  The diver reported that his cam lock had come undone.  The diver turned on his free flow, evacuated the helmet 
and attempted to relatch the neck dam.  Realising that something had become stuck in the cam, the diver reopened, cleared 
and relatched the cam lock. 

Having confirmed that the safety system was secure, the diver was ready to continue to the bottom.  However, the diving 
superintendent  thought  it  best  to  abort  the  dive  to  check  the  cam  lock  and  ensure  there  was  no  damage.    The  dive  was 
aborted and the diver returned to the surface safely. 

During debriefing, the diver stated that he had one hand on the down-line and the other held a cloth measuring tape.  The 
diver was proceeding down the down-line head first and the cam lock apparently made incidental contact with the down-line, 
causing the cam lock to dislodge. 

Investigation noted the following positive points: 

the diver was able to relatch the cam lock whilst in the water; 

the dive was promptly aborted in an effort to better understand the matter; 

the site leader gave immediate attention to the situation and contacted all appropriate supervisors; 

the contractor and client were in agreement and supportive of the entire investigative process. 

The following points were noted: 

the manufacturer manual includes the notice reproduced as figure 1; 

the diver had been carrying something whilst descending; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

there was a lack of appropriate safety pins for cam locks. 

The following lessons and corrective action were suggested: 

the use of a safety pin or other secondary safety device on Kirby 17A/B helmets (see figures 2 and 3); 

the importance of remaining up-to-date on safety alerts from manufacturers of dive equipment; 

  divers should not descend to the work site carrying tools or equipment. 

 

 

Figure 1 

Figure 2 

Figure 3 

Images used with permission.  Copyright Kirby Morgan Dive Systems 

 

3  Engine Room Flooding 

An incident has been brought to our attention wherein flooding started in the engine room of a ship.  This occurred during 
preparation  for  cleaning  of  a  sea  water  inlet  filter.    Cleats  on  the  filter  were  released  and  immediately  seawater  flooded 
through  the  filter.    Forty  minutes  after  the  filter  was  opened,  the  engine  room,  steering-gear  compartment  and 
accommodation had become flooded, resulting in a significant list to port and extensive equipment damage. 

Testing  proved  the  correct  functioning  of  the  valves  on  both  sides  of  the  sea  water  inlet  filter.    Correct  valve  position 
markings were visible and correct.  Nonetheless, the flooding seemed to be a result of insufficiently closed valves prior to 
opening of the filter.  The underlying causes of the incident were improper planning, inadequate procedures and/or lack of 
adherence to procedures. 

The following lessons learned should be noted: 

  The position of the valves on each side of the sea water inlet filter is crucial.  Always ensure valves are closed prior to 
opening  of  the  filter.    If  an  interruption  has  occurred,  re-check  the  position  of  the  valves  prior  to  recommencing  the 
work; 

  Remotely  operated  valves  must  be  secured  against  unintentional  operation,  before  commencing  removal  of  the  filter 

cover; 

operation; 

  The procedure for removing or re-tightening the filter cover is important.  If cleats are removed from cover hinges in an 
unplanned sequence, the operator may lose the possibility of re-tightening the cover.  Cleats should remain in position 
until it is safe to remove the cover.  Cross-loosen cleats while they rest in hinges.  When tightening cleats, follow the 
same procedure in order to avoid the cover being tightened incorrectly; 

  When cleaning of the filter is completed and cleats are tightened, carefully open valves on each side and check normal 

  The risk of misunderstanding or error can be significantly reduced if filter cleaning is completed by the same person and 

preferably without any interruptions during work. 

4  Object Falling from Height 

IMCA has received a report of an incident wherein a ‘banana sheave’ roller weighing 4.5kg came loose during operations.  It 
fell some 24 metres from the derrick and hit the drill floor.  Nobody was injured. 

The contractor’s planned maintenance management system in place is to be reviewed accordingly. 

The immediate  cause  of the  accident  was identified 
as being that the bolts which attached the rollers to 
the sheave had loosened.   

The underlying causes were noted as: 

insufficient design; 

insufficient maintenance; 

lack  of  documentation  and  drawings  describing 
that the sheaves should be function tested; 

insufficient  description  of  responsibility 
involved personnel; 

for 

insufficient  maintenance  management 
follow-up relating to lifting equip

ment. 

and 

 

The following points were noted: 

Lifting equipment should be examined and valid 
certificates  for  equipment  in  use  should  be 
presented; 

and  maintenance 

Inspection 
be 
performed on all sheaves that are in operation, 
with nuts and bolts inspected; 

should 

 

  All  bolts  on  rollers  should  be  fitted  with 
protective pins to stop the bolt from loosening; 

5 

Near-Miss During Lifting Operations 

We  have  received  reports  of  a  near-miss  wherein  a  worker 
was nearly caught between a load and a fixed structure. 

The immediate cause of the near-miss was crane creep, which 
was  compensated 
for  automatically  with  an  upward 
movement  of  the  load,  almost  trapping  the  worker  on  the 
deck. 

Underlying causes noted were: 

insufficient management engagement; 

responsibility for operation and maintenance of crane not 
being properly understood; 

inadequate  knowledge  of  crane  operational  routines  and 
condition; 

  maintenance routines not being specific enough. 

The recommended actions included: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ensuring  that  responsibility  and  reporting  routines  in  connection  with  crane  operation  and  maintenance  are  clearly 
understood by all involved; 

ensuring appropriate competence and training for all personnel with crane functions; 

checking and updating of maintenance routines, with daily follow-up for all cranes; 

replacement of the existing ‘creep compensator’ 

review of the company’s crane manuals and training material to ensure that they are appropriate and up-to-date. 

6  Near-Miss - Dropped Object Narrowly Misses Worker 

During some pipe work on the deckhead of a production platform, a spanner weighing 1.4kg was dropped from the work 
place and fell 6 metres, landing only one metre from another worker. 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

 

 

The immediate causes of this near-miss were that: 

the workplace was not adequately secured against the risk of dropped objects; 

there was an opening in the grating allowing the object to fall. 

Underlying causes noted were that: 

the work had been improperly managed and organised; 

there had been no procedures in place for this type of work. 

The resulting investigation made the following recommendations: 

  use should be made of checklists for safe work at heights; 

  checks should be made and, where necessary, deficient floor grating should be repaired; 

  clear marking out of barriers in areas below working areas should be ensured; 

  permit to work systems should be correctly adhered to. 

