AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/05 

Safety Flash 

May 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  ROV Free-Fall Incident 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  which  resulted  in  a  work-class  remotely  operated  vehicle  (ROV)  free-falling 
approximately  10  metres  into  the  sea  during  a  recovery  operation.    No  injuries  occurred  and  only  minor  damage  was 
sustained by the ROV, but the incident could have been severe with possible loss of life or damage to the vessel if the fall had 
occurred at a different stage of the recovery operation, or in bad weather conditions. 

The company’s site investigation revealed that the fall was caused by a lapse in the procedures used to safely recovery ROVs, 
probably due to complacency because of the stillness of the weather and over-confidence, due to the large number of times 
that the process had been completed.  A contributing factor to the incident may also have been the fail-safe condition of the 
docking device. 

The umbilical snapped at the outlet to the sheave block and is suspected to have failed due to a combined over tension from 
both the umbilical winch and the initial movement of the A-frame inboard.  A block-to-block position with the lifting wire 
meant that the docking device was pulled by the umbilical to a non fail-safe position and subsequent snapping of the umbilical 
prevented the docking device from capturing the ROV again in time to prevent its fall. 

The following actions were recommended as a result of the company’s investigation: 

 

further investigations into the design of the docking device to improve its fail-safe features; 

  verification of the strength of umbilicals via destruction testing of a cut-back on a yearly basis; 

  review of launch and recovery procedures to verify risk assessments; 

 

improved training of personnel specifically aimed at launch and recovery scenarios; 

review of lifting equipment to instigate visual indicators (colour banding, flags, lights, etc.) to represent the safe working areas 
and warn of ‘danger zone’ operational envelopes. 

2  Product Safety Recall – Kongsberg RPT Transponders 

We have been passed the attached product information bulletin relating to Kongsberg transponder models RPT316, RPT319 
and RPT324 and spare end cap assemblies which we have been asked to bring to members’ attention. 

PRODUCT INFORMATION BULLETIN 

 

13 MAY 2005 
 
TRANSPONDER MODELS RPT316, RPT319 AND 
RPT324 & SPARE END CAP ASSEMBLIES  

 
ISSUED DATE:   
 
PRODUCTS 
AFFECTED:   
 
PRODUCT RECALL 
 
It has been identified that there is a possible safety concern on the RPT range of underwater 
acoustic  transponders .    The  likelihood  of  a  serious  product  safety  incident  is  considered 
small, but Kongsberg is advising all customers and users that there is a product safety recall 
in place for all possible affected products and related spare parts as of this date. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The RPT transponder units are designed to incorporate a built- in gas pressure relief valve in 
the  back  end  caps  as  an  enhanced  safety feature.    This feature is intended to prevent the 
build  up  of  an  internal  product  pressure  differential  in  the  event  of  certain  rare  fault 
conditions. 
 
After review of a customer feedback we have identified that there is a small possibility that 
the  pressure  relief  valve  on  certain  RPT  units  (and  related  spare  end  cap  assemblies)  may 
not function as designed.  The  failure of the relief valve to operate as intended may create 
an  increased  safety  risk  under  certain  rare  fault  conditions  which  may  allow a gas pressure 
build up inside the unit: 
 
• 
• 
• 
 
PROPOSED ACTIONS 
 
All RPT units, and related spare end cap assemblies should be removed from service at the 
earliest opportunity, and returned to Kongsberg Maritime A.S or Kongsberg Maritime Ltd for 
test evaluation and possible remedial action for those products affected. 
 
Prior to transporting any RPT products from an offshore site, or from onshore warehouse or 
storage, please ensure that the following additional safety actions have been performed: 
 
• 

Faulty internal battery conditions 
Electrolysis from a sea-water ingress 
Ingress of pressurised helium gas (diving environment) 

Follow procedure contained in "RPT transponder pressure relief valve verification and 
repair" procedure circulated on 18th January 2005. 

 
A copy of this procedure is attached. 
 
Once the safety procedure has been performed on all identified RPT products, please contact 
KMAS  or  KML  Customer  Support  department  for  a  Return  Material  Authorisation  (RMA) 
number.  Contact details are provided below.  Once the RMA number has been provided, the 
units should be consigned to KSAS or KML Customer Support Department for evaluation and 
remedial work if required. 
 

…..Cont/d. 

PRODUCT INFORMATION BULLETIN 

 

 
 
Kongsberg Maritime Contact Addresses: 
 
 
Kongsberg Maritime AS 
Customer Support Department (UI) 
PO Box 111 
N-3191 
Horten 
Norway 
 
Tel: + 47 33 03 40 00 
email: vidar.steen- hansen@kongsberg.com 
 
 
 
 
                         
 

Kongsberg Maritime Ltd.  
Customer Support Department (Offshore) 
Campus 1, Science & Technology Park 
Balgownie  Road 
Bridge of Don 
Aberdeen AB22 8GT  
 
Tel: +44 (0) 1224 226500 
email: douglas.aiken@kongsberg.com 

