AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/08 

Safety Flash 

May 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Loss of DP Position Caused by Incorrect Gyro Heading 

An incident has been reported to IMCA in which a DP Class 2 shuttle tanker lost its position during a DP offtake operation 
due  to  sudden  and  simultaneous  loss  of  all  position  reference  systems.    Investigation  disclosed  that  loss  of  DP  position 
reference systems was directly caused by incorrect gyro heading, corrupting all offset calculations in the DP model. 

Root cause of incorrect gyro heading was found to be erroneous GPS signals to all gyros over a short period of time. 

A  corrective  action  in  the  form  of  more  stringent  criteria  for  acceptance  of  position  reference  systems  into  the  DP  has 
already been established. 

Furthermore the gyro manufacturer is about to upgrade the software to include rejection of erroneous GPS latitude/speed 
compensation data. 

 

 

 

2  Abrasion of Metal Casing 

A member has reported a case of serious abrasion on the metal casing of the flame arrester on an oxygen hose.  This was 
discovered during routine replacement of the securing Jubilee clips on the oxygen hose flame arresters. 

Where  the  hose  had  been  left  coiled  on  its  storage  brackets  and  had  been  able  to  swing  freely  back  and  forth  with  the 
movement of the vessel, it was noticed that this had resulted in the abrasion of the underside of the metal casing of the flame 
arrester.    The  resulting  wear  on  the  metal  was  sufficient  to  reveal  the  O-ring  inside  the  arrester,  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
photograph. 

This rendered the arrester useless, and it is evident from the photograph that oxygen would now be able to leak freely past 
this  area  and  into  the  atmosphere,  thereby  enriching  it  and  making  it  more  readily  combustible  should  fire  or  a  cause  of 
ignition occur. 

It is not uncommon for lengths of oxy/acetylene hose to be stored in ‘out of the way’ places, ready to be uncoiled and used 
on an occasional basis and, as a consequence of this, defects may only be noticed when the equipment is eventually needed. 

Jubilee clips may be considered inappropriate for such hose connections as they can easily corrode and, due to their small 
size, do not provide an adequate sealing effect.  Members are recommended to check all such hoses and arresters for wear 
and damage: this equipment is sometimes needed in a hurry and should always be in a serviceable condition. 

Abraded casing of arrester showing 
the internal O-ring 
 

Abraded casing caused by continual 
rubbing against ship’s steelwork 
while on hanging brackets 
 

 

