Safety Flash 

December 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 30/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

The  UK  Health  &  Safety  Executive  (UK  HSE)  publishes  regular  news  bulletins  on  recent  safety 
incidents.  Many of these are worth bringing to your attention.  This safety flash consists of press 
releases relating to prosecutions by UK HSE following incidents, that we consider will be of interest 
and information to IMCA members and their offshore crews.   

See UK HSE news page: http://www.hse.gov.uk/news/index.htm for further details.  

1 

Self-Employed Diver Sentenced for Falsifying Diving Medical Certificate 

What happened? 

What went wrong? 

A  man  has  been  sentenced  after  supplying  falsified diving  medical certificates to  a  diving  company  in  2016.    A 
Magistrates’  Court  heard  that  this  individual  did  not  hold  a  valid  medical  certificate  of  fitness  to  dive.    See 
http://press.hse.gov.uk/2017/self-employed-diver-sentenced-for-falsifying-diving-medical-certificate/   

Investigation showed that in 2016 the defendant was in possession of  a certificate closely resembling a genuine 
certificate but which had been altered to display a false expiry date.  The defendant subsequently produced the 
falsified certificate to enter into a contract to provide his services as a commercial diver. 

The defendant pleaded guilty to six breaches of Regulation 12 (1)(b) of the UK Diving at Work Regulations 1997 and 
one  breach  of  Section  33  (1)(m)  of  the  Health  and  Safety  at  Work  Act  1974.    He  was  sentenced  to  32  weeks 
imprisonment suspended for 12 months, 150 hours community service and ordered to pay costs of £12,000. 

The HSE inspector commented that the UK HSE will not hesitate to take appropriate enforcement action against 
persons in possession of or using a falsified fitness to dive certificate. 

Contractors are reminded that it is their responsibility to check the validity of their diver’s medical certificates of 
fitness  to  dive,  especially,  when  the  doctor  and  diver  are  unknow  to  them.    Divers,  who  may  be  unfit  for 
employment not only put themselves at risk but also others who may have deal with the consequences. 

Members may wish to refer to the following recent incident: 

  Counterfeit Training Certificates 
 

 

 

 

 
2  Worker Suffers Life Changing Injury After Pressure Test Failure 

The UK HSE advises that three companies were sentenced after an employee suffered serious fractures to his leg.  
An employee of one company was taking part in a pressure test of a boiler at the site of a second company.  A third 
company were assisting in the pressure test.  The injured person was there to verify the test.  

What happened? 

What went wrong? 

A valve on a pressure test rig was pressurised above the safe working limit and failed, causing the hose and metal 
fitting assembly to whip round, striking the employee on the right leg, causing serious compound fractures. 

As a result of the incident, the injured person had his leg amputated from the knee down.  The HSE’s principal 
inspector noted that all three companies had failed the injured person.  If appropriate pressure relief had been fitted 
and the companies had put in place a system of work that was safe, then this person would not have been exposed 
to the harm he suffered. 

IMCA notes that particularly close attention to responsibility for safety should be taken where different companies 
or organisations are working together at the same site.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident: 

  Failure Of High Pressure Fitting 

3 

Four Hand and Finger Injury Incidents 

Incident 1 - Company fined after exposing workers to Hand Arm Vibration Syndrome (HAVS) 

What happened? 

The HSE is reminding companies of the necessity of monitoring workers’ health after an organisation was fined for 
exposing six maintenance team workers to Hand Arm Vibration Syndrome (HAVS).  This was discovered following a 
health surveillance programme.   

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Investigation found: 

  The  six  workers’  conditions  were  likely  to  have  been  caused  or 
worsened  by  the  use  of  vibratory  power  tools.    Staff  in  the 
maintenance  and 
refurbishment  departments  experienced 
significant exposure to hand arm vibration in their daily work which 
put them at risk of developing or exacerbating existing HAVS; 

  The company neither adequately planned its working methods nor 

trained or informed employees on the risks to their health; 

  The  company  did  not  limit  the  duration  and  magnitude  of  exposure  to  vibration  and  failed  to  put  in  place 

suitable health surveillance to identify problems at an early stage. 

Hand  Arm  Vibration  Syndrome  (HAVS)  is  a  serious  and  permanent  condition  caused  by  regular  and  frequent 
exposure to hand-arm vibration.  HAVS results in tingling, numbness, pain and loss of strength in the hands which 
may affect the ability to do work safely and cause pain, distress and sleep disturbance. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

  Uncontrolled Exposure To Hand-Arm Vibration (HAVS) 

  Two Cases Of Hand Injuries – UK HSE 

 

 
Incident 2 - Welder loses two fingers when manual lift goes wrong  

An engineering company was fined after a worker suffered injuries to three fingers when they were crushed by a 
metal frame he was attempting to lift with colleagues.   A worker  suffered crushed fingers when a metal frame 
weighing approximately 250 kilograms fell whilst  it was being lifted manually to carry out welding.  Two fingers 
were partially amputated later as a result of his injuries. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Investigation found: 

  Manual lifting and turning of these frames was not an isolated occurrence and a number of the frames had 

been made in this manner over the three years that the company has been in existence;  

  No steps had been taken to avoid the manual handling or to assess the manual handling operation and take 

steps to reduce the likelihood of injury. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

Lack Of Safety Awareness: Crush Injury During Lifting Operations 

Incident 3 – worker’s fingers severed 

What happened?  

A worker had four fingers amputated while operating a metalworking lathe.  An employee had been using emery 
cloth  to  clean  steel  shafts  on  a  metalworking  lathe.   He  was  holding  the  emery  cloth  by  hand  when  his  gloves 
became  entangled  in  the  lathe.    He  lost  four  fingers  on  his  right  hand,  broke  several  bones  in  his  left  arm  and 
dislocated his wrist as a result. 

What went wrong? 

Investigation found that the company had failed to ensure the work to clean the metal shafts was carried out safely.  
It wasn’t an isolated incident and their employees had been applying emery cloth directly by hand on the lathe for 
several years prior to the accident. 

The HSE Inspector said that this employee “suffered life changing injuries in an accident that could have easily been 
prevented.  The risks involved with applying emery cloth by hand on metalworking lathes are widely known and the 
company should have done more to ensure that they carried out the work in a safe manner.” 

This incident is identical – save only the outcome which was worse in this case to the August 2017 incident: 

  Two Cases Of Hand Injuries – UK HSE.   

Incident 4 – worker suffers crush injuries 

What happened?  

A  worker  suffered  crush  injuries  from  trapping  his  hand  in  an  unguarded  printing  machine.    An  employee  was 
injured  when  his  hand  was  drawn  into the  print  rollers  while  he  was  attempting  to clean the  running machine 
resulting in partial amputation of two fingers. 

What went wrong? 

Investigation found that the lack of guarding on the machine was the root cause of this incident together with a 
lack of training and supervision. 

 

 
The HSE inspector said “This case serves as a reminder to industry that planning and guarding of machinery requires 
regular reviews and monitoring to ensure workplace safety.  The need to 
review machinery guarding is a positive benefit to improving workplace 
safety”. 

Members may wish to review the following incident:  

 

Lost  Time  Injury  (LTI): Incident  With Circular Saw Leads To Loss Of 
Thumb 

Members  are  encouraged to bring to the  attention of their crews, the 
IMCA  safety  promotional  materials  on  hand  safety  and  other  topics, 
available free to members here. 

4 

Two Industrial Vehicle Incidents 

Though  these  two  incidents  do  not  pertain to  the  marine  environment,  the  underlying  issues  involved  –  traffic 
management  and  separation,  planning  and  safe  systems of  work,  risk  assessment,  work  at  height  etc.  –  are  of 
relevance and interest to IMCA members.  

Incident 1 – Driver fatally crushed 

What happened? 

What went wrong? 

A visiting HGV (Heavy Goods Vehicle) driver was delivering materials to a site when he was crushed to death as a 
forklift truck overturned whilst lifting a load from the trailer of the HGV. 

Investigation revealed that the forklift truck had been overloaded and that visiting delivery drivers were not kept 
at a safe distance from the loading and unloading operations. 

The company was fined £1.2 million.  The HSE inspector said: “Standing too close to where loading or unloading 
work is being carried out can put people in harm’s way so people, such as delivery drivers, should be in a position of 
safety  when  forklift  trucks  are  operating.    This  tragic  incident  could  have  been  avoided  if  the  company  had 
implemented a safe procedure to ensure that pedestrians were kept at a safe distance during loading and unloading 
work.” 

Incident 2 - Employee falls from bonnet of vehicle 

What happened?  

An employee fell from the bonnet of a tar laying machine.  He was standing on the bonnet of the machine to cut 
the branches of overhanging trees when he fell from the bonnet into the tar hopper.  He sustained a fractured back 
and damaged spinal cord causing permanent paralysis from the waist down. 

What went wrong? 

Investigation found that the company had failed to plan the task in hand, resulting in an employee using the bonnet 
of the tar laying machine which was not a safe place to work.  

Serious and life changing injuries could have easily been prevented had the company planned the work at height, 
including an assessment of the risks and either avoidance of working at height using long reach tools or measures 
being put in place to prevent a fall.  

Members may wish to review the following incident:  

  Fatal Fall From Height During Cargo Operations – Johanna C 

 

