AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/11 

Safety Flash 

  July 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Hand Injury while using Hydraulic Impact Wrench 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  diver  sustained  a  cut  injury  to  his  left  hand  palm  whilst  working  with  a 
hydraulic  impact  wrench.    A  team  of  two  divers  were  engaged  in  removing  bolts  of  an  old  riser  clamp  at  shallow  depths.  
During one such bolt removal, when the first diver held the wrench’s trigger handle using one hand, the wrench socket came 
off from the bolt and the wrench began to fall.  He attempted to prevent the wrench from falling to the seabed, and whilst 
doing  so,  his  left  hand  came  in  contact  with  the  rotating/revolving  socket,  and  the  socket  retaining  pin  (makeshift  welding 
rod) cut the palm of his left hand. 

The  diver  was  safely  and  promptly  recovered  to  surface  and  provided  with  first  aid.  Then  he  was  sent  to  the  doctor  for 
further evaluation.  He resumed duty on the same day. 

An investigation revealed that a long welding rod twisted around the socket had been used as a retaining pin to prevent the 
socket from falling off during use.  This practice was considered ‘normal’.  

  

 

Showing use of welding rod as a retaining pin 

The following actions were taken to prevent recurrence: 

  As advised by the manufacturer, use of the correct size and length of retaining pin, covered by an O-ring, to secure the 

socket. 

   

   

 

Showing correct size and length of retaining pin to secure the socket 

 
2  Recent Near Miss Incidents Involving Potential Dropped Objects 

There  have  been  several  recent  cases  of  potential  dropped  objects  which  have  been  brought  to  IMCA’s  attention  by  the 
Marine Safety Forum in MSF Safety Flashes 11-20 and 11-22. 
 
Case 1:  Unusual Potential Dropped Object 

 

During  positioning  of  a  container  on  an  offshore  rig,  a 
large  lump  of  what  appeared  to  be  road  tar  was  seen 
within  one  of  the  forklift  pockets  of  the  container.  The 
lump  measured  30  x  15  x  5cm  and  weighed  1.2kg.  The 
container, which had forklift pockets on all four sides, had 
been on a round trip to the rig, gone back ashore and had 
been taken back to the rig before the hazard was spotted, 
some  two  weeks  after 
its  original  despatch.  The 
investigation could not determine at what point the lump 
of  tar  entered  the  forklift  pockets  but  it  could  not  have 
been at the supplier nor at the supply base, both of which 
have  fully  concreted  yard  surfaces.  Therefore,  it  is 
possible  that  it  was  present  for  some  time  prior  to  the 
container's original despatch. 

It  is  presumed  that  being  sticky,  the  lump  of  tar  was 
lodged against the top of the inside of one of the forklift 
pockets, only eventually becoming dislodged due to some 
form of shock to the container. This  made it difficult for 
the supplier to spot and remove. It is also presumed that 
it  was  in  one  of  the  transverse  forklift  pockets  and 
therefore invisible to gantry checks at the supply base. 

A  vessel  completed  discharging  a  cargo  of  20  inch 
uncapped casing to an offshore  installation  after a period 
of  adverse  weather.  During  routine  operations  on  the 
installation  a  piece  of  metal,  a  D-ring  plate  cover,  was 
found inside one of the discharged joints of 20 inch casing. 
The  drops  calculator  classed  the  potential  as  a  fatality  if 
the  object  were  to  have  been  dropped  from  more  than 
2.4 metres.  

Members are encouraged to be vigilant in checking for all 
potential dropped objects. Whilst the probability of items 
sticking to the top of the inside of forklift pockets is low, 
the  impact  of  those  items  falling  out  and  causing  harm  is 
high. Provision for  checking for and removing such items 
might include: 

  Use of mirrors and lights on extended poles; 

  Use of brushes and sweep-through; 

  Safe  systems  for  doing  checks  at  eye  height  to  assist 

ergonomics.  

    

Piece of tar – potential dropped object

Several days after the object in Case 2 was discovered, on 
the  same  installation,  a  wooden  wedge  was  found  inside 
another  20  inch  joint  of  casing.  The  drops  calculator 
classed the potential as a fatality if the object were to be 
dropped from more than 3.7 metres. 

Case 2:  Potential Dropped Metal Piece 

Case 3:  Potential Dropped Metal Piece 

 

 

D-ring plate cover - potential dropped object 

 

Wooden wedge - potential dropped object

Two of the above-mentioned objects (Case 2 and Case 3) were identified as belonging to the vessel and had become lodged 
inside the casing due to the vessel shipping water on deck during rough weather conditions. Subsequently, all wooden wedges 
used on this particular vessel were painted white on their top sides to make them easier to see in the dark.  

Members are reminded of IMCA’s safety promotional material on avoiding dropped objects: 

  Pocket safety card: IMCA SPC 12  Avoiding dropped objects; 

  Safety poster: IMCA SPP 04  Avoiding dropped objects; 

 

IMCA SEL 05/11  Dropped object prevention – www.dropsonline.org. 

 

 

 
3  Electrician Received Electric Shock  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  electrician  received  an  electric  shock  whilst  working  on  faulty  electrical 
equipment.  The vessel electrician had been called to the gymnasium because the running machine had developed a fault and 
was no longer working.  

The running machine had been purchased for the vessel in the USA and required a110v supply.  A 220v/110v transformer had 
also been sourced in the USA and was mounted on the bulkhead next to the running machine, with a connecting cable into 
the vessel 220v supply.  

During initial investigation of the fault, the electrician decided to remove the 220v supply cable from the transformer to allow 
testing to be completed.  The electrician unplugged the supply cable from the transformer connection first, unaware that it 
had two male connections (the standard configuration is one male and one  female connection to ensure live terminals are 
recessed).  As he started to remove the connection from the transformer, his left hand came into contact with the exposed 
live pins and he received an electric shock. 

After  receiving  the  shock,  the  electrician  fully  unplugged  the  supply  cable  from  the  vessel  220v  socket  and  reported  the 
incident.    He  attended  the  vessel  medic  where  he  was  given  a  thorough  observation,  no  injuries  were  identified  and  no 
further treatment was required. 

An investigation revealed the following: 

  Poor work practice and inadequate risk assessment for electrical isolations; 

  There was a poor level of hazard awareness and task planning prior to starting work;  

  Good practice is that electrical supply cables should be isolated from the power supply prior to testing; 

  Design deficiencies of the electrical equipment that was being installed and used on the vessel were not identified; 

 

It should not be assumed that equipment purchased for the vessel is fit for purpose until it has been correctly checked 
and all potential hazards have been identified, risks assessed and any mitigating actions put in place; 

  Electrical equipment purchased for the vessel should not be utilised until a full risk assessment has been conducted and 

all relevant mitigating safety actions have been completed. 

Actions taken included the following: 

  Ensure electrical equipment onboard has the correct connections, configuration and rating for safe use; 

  Ensure that all electrical equipment purchased for the vessel is fully inspected and tested and a full risk assessment of its 

intended use takes place prior to installation and use. 

Transformer for use with running machine 

Supply cable with two male fittings 

 

 

 
4  Fatality after Capsize of Workboat with Eight Persons Onboard 

A member has reported an incident in which a workboat capsized during personnel transfer, causing seven people to fall into 
the sea, one of whom drowned.  The workboat was transferring personnel from a vessel to a cargo barge during the hours 
of darkness.  Weather conditions were: Wind E 16 knots; Sea state 0.7m  – 1.3m with period 3.8s, which conditions were 
considered by the member to be within acceptable parameters for this kind of operation. 

The workboat approached the cargo barge from the stern portside.  One person disembarked the workboat onto the cargo 
barge.  Immediately after this, the workboat was hit by two waves from the port side; the first filling it with water and the 
second causing it to capsize.  The person who disembarked raised the alarm by radio. Two members of the crew climbed 
onto the hull of the capsized workboat and unsuccessfully attempted to right the boat by operating the manual handle to the 
self-righting gear.  The other five persons made their way to the polypropylene rope attached to the emergency tow wire 
located  on  the  stern  port  side  of  the  cargo  barge.    Of  these  five  persons,  three  did  not  hold  on  and  drifted  away,  the 
deceased being one of them. The other two were recovered safely onto the cargo barge.  A tug vessel present in the area, 
closest to the cargo barge, was requested to search for and recover the lost personnel.  This tug recovered the two crew 
members from the hull of the capsized workboat, and two crew members from the water who had been holding onto the 
polypropylene  rope.    The  third  missing  crew  member  was  recovered  later  by  a  supply  vessel  in  the  area  but  was  already 
dead.  

        Cargo barge  

 

           Workboat used 

    

 

 

An investigation revealed the following: 

  The problem had not been anticipated; the capsizing of this type of workboat had never occurred previously; 

  The workboat had frequently been utilised in the same sea conditions including operations during the hours of darkness;  

  Maintenance and inspection of the workboats was not fully in line with International Convention for the Safety of Life at 

Sea (SOLAS) requirements;  

 

Inspection  of the  self-righting  gear  revealed  that  the  safety  pin  utilised  to  prevent  activation  during  transportation  had 
never been removed. Inspection of the records of the workboat manual revealed that  no reference was  made to this 
device or that it should be removed before use at sea; 

  Emergency response was not adequate; thus, the full detail of the emergency was not understood by those responsible 

for initiating the relevant response action; 

  Vessel man overboard procedures did not cover overboard scenarios remote from the vessel.  Man overboard drills and 

exercises were limited to loss overboard from main vessel and did not consider personnel working in remote locations. 

The following corrective actions were suggested: 

  Ensure that a backup vessel is always present during vessel to vessel personnel transfer; 

  Ensure that workboat personnel have specific personal protective equipment (PPE) for transfer operations dependent on 
local  climate  and  conditions,  including  personal  locator  beacons,  life-jackets,  waterproof  radios,  work  suits  as 
appropriate, and appropriate headgear;  

  Ensure that during the hours of darkness the bridge watchman has access to night vision binoculars; 

  Review procedure for personnel transfer, to include clear line of command and who should authorise the launching of a 

workboat; 

  Develop drills and exercises for man overboard scenario remote from vessel; 

  Amend planned maintenance schedule to include checks of self-righting gear and develop user checklist; 

 
  Ensure boarding arrangements on barges are properly considered before use; consider the possibility of development of 

improved or appropriate boat landing access on barges; 

  Ensure adequate lighting is available on cargo barges; 

Identify appropriate tracking system for workboats; 

Investigate the use of alternate means of personnel transfer. 

Members are reminded that IMCA has published IMCA SEL 025   Guidance on the transfer of personnel to and from offshore 
vessels, which can be downloaded from https://members.imca-int.com/documents/core/sel/docs/. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

