Safety Flash 

May 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Theme: Fires 

All  of  the  below  incidents  involve  fires  or  potential  fires.    In  the  first,  we  see  vividly  illustrated  the  desired 
consequence of the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).  The next three relate broadly to fires or potential 
fires arising from procedures or instructions not followed, inappropriate modifications to equipment, and failure to 
secure equipment properly.  The fifth incident covers a near miss from a leaking fuel line, and the sixth relates to a 
fire and explosion which occurred recently on a vessel moored near to a members’ vessel. 

1  How PPE Works: Fire and Thermal Protection 

What happened? 

The US Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has published a report of a fire on an offshore 
production platform in the Gulf of Mexico, resulting in burn injuries to three workers.   

All three  individuals were reported to have  been wearing safety glasses, hard hats  and  flame  resistant clothing 
(FRC),  although  at  least  one  was  believed  to  have  rolled  up  his  sleeves.    Their  injuries  were  described  as  a 
combination of first and second degree burns to their hands, forearms, neck and face.  The BSEE considers that the 
proper use of appropriate PPE likely prevented additional injuries.  The initial report can be found here. 

 

 

 

  Are YOU and your personnel all wearing proper PPE where the potential exists for thermal exposure from fire? 

  Ensure that the PPE selected for the job reflects the probable and possible hazards of the job.  Are you wearing 

 
Lessons learnt 

the correct PPE?  

BSEE recommend reference to: 

  NFPA 2113, Standard on Selection, Care, Use and Maintenance of Flame- Resistant Garments for Protection of 

Industrial Personnel Against Short-Duration Thermal Exposures from Fire;  

  Occupational Safety and Health Standard (OSHA) 1910.132 for Personal Protective Equipment. 

Other standards and guidance will be applicable outside the United States. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents, both cases in which PPE prevented things being much worse: 

  Crewman suffers cut to hand – but gloves prevented it being much worse; 

  Serious finger injury: procedures during engine maintenance. 

2  Galley Fire: Failure to Follow Stove/Oven Installation Instructions  

What happened? 

The United States Coastguard (USCG) has published Marine Safety Alert 02-17, relating to a fire on an offshore 
platform.  A manufacturer had improperly installed a commercial grade electric stove.  As a result, the platforms 
crew was awakened by the sound of smoke alarms from a galley fire.  They acted quickly to isolate and fight the 
fire and were assisted by another vessel.  The crews’ rapid response limited the damage, which could have been 
much worse. 

Members should be reminded of the importance of following instructions when installing or indeed operating galley 
cooking equipment, and in particular may wish to ensure that all commercial grade stoves and ovens are installed 
with the proper clearances to prevent ignition of combustible materials. 

The full Safety Alert can be found here.  Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Fire in the deep fat fryer. 

3  Dangerous Modifications Found Within a Gas Valve Unit Room 

Don’t allow corrective actions to create additional hazardous conditions! 

The  USCG  has  issued  Safety  Alert  05-17  to  warn  of  a 
potentially  dangerous  situation  involving  modifications 
within  gas  valve  unit  (GVU)  rooms  aboard  a  liquefied 
natural gas (LNG) carrier. 

This  room  is  located  within  the  machinery  space  of  the 
dual fuel, diesel-electric propelled vessel.  These engines 
can burn petroleum oil or LNG in gaseous form.  The GVU 
is a multi-component device which manages the liquefied 
natural  gas  pressure  supplied  to  the  propulsion  engines.  
The  GVU  room  has  an  air  intake  and  exhaust  system 
designed  to  continuously  ventilate  and  exchange  the  air 
within the space to reduce fire, explosion, and hazardous 
atmosphere risks from developing if gas leaks should occur 
from the equipment.  The atmosphere of the room is monitored by a catalytic methane sensor located near the 

 

 
inlet to the room’s ventilation exhaust trunk.  The GVU room’s ventilation creates a vacuum within the room when 
the two access doors are shut. 

During a repair on one cylinder of a main engine vessel, engineers had to remove an expansion bellows.  Upon 
replacement  of  the  bellows  an  O-ring,  separating  its  inner  and  outer  sections,  was  damaged.    This  error  went 
unnoticed until a crew member was making a round in the enclosed GVU room while the engine had been operating 
on gas.  After entering the GVU room he was overcome by methane gas and nearly lost consciousness.  Fortunately, 
he was able to exit the space into a safe atmosphere.  After the incident, the GVU room atmosphere was measured 
to be 22 percent methane and 17 percent oxygen by volume.  Methane is an asphyxiant which displaces oxygen 
and is extremely flammable.  The installed methane sensor failed to detect the accumulation of gas despite not 
having malfunctioned. 

Engineers had rigged a hose from the outlet of the gas evacuation fan, across the GVU room to the sensor at the 
entrance exhaust duct.  This unauthorized arrangement, which was identified during a Coast Guard examination, 
could have likely disabled the sensor’s ability to detect methane leakages from other components within the GVU 
room. 

The US Coast Guard strongly recommends to Flag States, classification societies, underwriters and insurers that 
respective  examiners,  surveyors,  and  inspection  personnel  maintain  an  acute  awareness  regarding  any  system 
modifications,  whether  deemed  potentially  hazardous  or  not,  to  ensure  such  modifications  have  received  the 
proper engineering reviews, approvals, and supporting documentation. 

The full USCG Safety Alert 05/17 can be found here. 

4  Battery Fire  

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) reports an incident in which, during the early hours of the morning during a period 
of adverse weather, the fire alarm in the vessel battery locker was activated.  The crew mustered and the fire team 
assembled and upon investigation it was discovered that there was a small flame and sparks being emitted from a 
spare battery that was stored in the battery locker on the top shelf.  

What were the causes of the incident? 

The battery had been delivered during the previous port call and stored within the battery locker.  Unfortunately, 
it had been placed on a storage shelf with no attempt to secure it in place.  During a period of heavy weather, the 
battery tipped onto its side and slid against the steel lining of the bulkhead.  

 

 

 
As the battery terminals were not covered, this caused the battery to short circuit and led to it overheating.  Once 
the battery had reached ignition temperature, the casing melted, setting off the fire alarm. 

What lessons were learnt?  And what were the actions? 

  Everything  loose  on  a  vessel  should  be  secured  in  place  to  prevent  movement.    Assume  nothing;  secure 

everything; 

  All spare batteries should have the terminals covered with insulating material to prevent accidental shorting. 

The incident is available on MSF’s website here.  Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

Loading and securing of containers; 

 

 

‘Routine’ task, non-routine result: Batteries stored sideways leak battery acid. 

5  Near Miss: Fire Hazard from Leaking Fuel Supply Line 

What happened? 

A  potential  fire  hazard  was  discovered,  caused  by  a  failed  fuel  pipe  connection  on  the  supply  line  to  the  main 
engines.  The Chief Engineer was called to engine room with a report of a leak on a low pressure fuel supply line 
supplying both main engines.  Upon arriving in the engine room and assessing the situation, a temporary repair was 
effected, due to being unable to isolate the pipe.  Self-amalgamating tape was used to reduce the leak to a weep 
and then fibre-glass resin and bandage was applied, to try and seal the weep. 

At the time, both main engines were running with the starboard engine on load, although the port propeller was 
declutched.  Three auxiliary engines and all the thrusters were on load. 

Temporary repairs to the pipe 

Complex shape and fitting of pipe 

 

The immediate cause was found to be a failed weld on a T-piece of the pipe.  The root cause is believed to be the 
age of the pipe, an original fit from the vessel’s construction, incurring natural degradation over time. 

  The  leak  was  discovered  early  as  a  result  of  due  diligence  and  good  watchkeeping,  which  allowed  for  a 

  The  vessel  notified  shore  management  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  incident,  providing  detailed  Incident 

reports, supporting information and photographs; 

What were the causes? 

Actions taken and lessons learnt 

controlled temporary repair; 

 

 
  Vibration, owing to  the  proximity  of  the  main  engines,  is  going  to  be  an  issue  with equipment  of  this  sort.  

Engineers should maintain awareness of equipment shortcomings and manufacturing design weaknesses; 

 

 As such failures cannot always be predicted and vessels should always carry appropriate pipe repair solutions 
such as plastic steel, fibre glass resin, pipe repair clamps etc.; 

 

In this case, a trend in the failure of fuel supply piping was noticed; this was the 4th failure within 4 months. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Cracked Fuel Line Results in an Engine Fire; 

  Fatal Engine Room Fire on Suction Dredger Arco Avon [cause of death: the third engineer was attempting to 

repair a failed fuel pipe when fuel, under pressure in the pipe, ignited]; 

  Near Miss: Fire Hazard arising from Failed Fuel Pipe Connection. 

6  Catastrophic Fire and Explosion on Nearby Vessel 

What happened? 

A vessel was double-banked alongside engaged with routine maintenance jobs, when a fire broke out on a vessel 
transporting  a  petroleum  product  which  was  berthed  alongside  at  a  berth  130  m  away.    There  was  a  massive 
explosion and the tanker broke in to two.  The Port emergency operation room was alerted immediately and the 
firefighters prevented the blaze from spreading to adjacent ships, and prevented oil spillage.  

Unfortunately, one crew member on the burning vessel was killed, four others suffered burns, and sixteen sailors 
were evacuated safely.   

Our members’ vessel sustained damage on the starboard side escape ladder and 5m of railings due to flying debris 
following the explosion.  An emergency muster took place for head count, damage was reported to Port control, 
and engines were started immediately for emergency cast off to a safe location. 

What lessons were learnt?   

 

Immediate action or response should be in place to cast off the vessel from the area in case of an emergency; 

  All should be vigilant to what is happening on surrounding vessels. 

This incident took place in Sharjah on 13 May and was reported in local news media.  

 

 

