AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/12 

Safety Flash 

 December 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Poorly Secured Load during Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which equipment being back-loaded was found to be incorrectly and unsafely secured.  
The incident occurred during demobilisation of a third-party winch and running line monitor power supply unit (RLM PSU).  
It was noticed when this equipment was returned to the third party base that the RLM PSU had been secured to the winch 
frame  using  polypropylene  rope  in  an  unsafe  manner.    This  could  have  resulted  in  the  power  pack  becoming  a  potential 
dropped object or being damaged in transit. 

Red arrows illustrating how RLM PSU was secured 

to winch frame using polypropylene rope 

 

 

 

Items appropriately secured with securing straps in place 

Our member’s investigation drew the following conclusions: 

♦  There was no identified storage  area for the RLM  PSU prior to the backload taking place.  Appropriate storage  areas 

should be identified for all third party equipment; 

♦  Third  party  equipment  such  as  the  RLM  PSU  should  be  correctly  packaged  and  secured  before  equipment  load 

out/backload; 

♦  All items should be thoroughly checked before lifting to ensure that appropriate securing arrangements are in place. 

Members may also wish to refer to the following documents: 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SPP 04 – Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 12 – Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 04 – Lifting operations 

2  LTI: Person Fell Over on Helideck and Broke Arm 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following Safety Flash regarding an incident in which a helicopter landing 
officer (HLO) was thrown off his feet by turbulence from the helicopter as it landed.  He fell on the helideck, breaking his 
arm.    The  immediate  cause  of  the  incident  was  that  the  HLO  was  not  sheltering  properly  from  the  downdraft  as  the 
helicopter  landed.    The  report  can  be  downloaded  from  www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-
flash-12.41.pdf  

 
3  LTI: Serious Hand Injury during Subsea Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver injured his hand during subsea lifting operations.  A diver was about to 
pull  a  4m  round  sling  (20  ton  SWL)  through  a  master  link.    While  he  was  hanging  the  two-headed  sling  eyes  on  the 
corresponding hang-off point, his right hand thumb and index finger were sandwiched between the sling and hang-off point, 
resulting  in  a  crush  injury.    The  diver  reported  this  to  the  dive  supervisor  immediately,  and  the  supervisor  arranged  for 
emergency  recovery  of  the  injured  diver.    After  he  was  recovered  to  surface,  he  received  emergency  medical  treatment 
before being evacuated ashore by helicopter. 

Injured hand 

Illustration of the right hand position holding the sling (simulated) 

 

 

The company’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The hang-off point was relatively short, approximately 13cm (see figure above right), while the diameter of the sling was 

6cm, and the thickness of the two-headed sling eyes was 12cm; 

♦  The sling had a tendency to come off the hook under the influence of wave surge; 

♦  The moment the diver finished and left the area to wait for the lifting operation, the sling became unhooked, resulting in 

it being necessary for him to return and repeat the operation several times; 

♦  After repeating the operation several times, the diver became irritable and grasped the sling in an incorrect way, putting 

himself in danger, resulting in the injury; 

♦  The  diver  was  working  in  the  splash  zone;  the  swell  made  it  very  difficult  for  him  to  control  himself.    The  diver  had 

reported that his bailout cylinder and helmet frequently hit the underwater structure. 

Hook-off point in splash zone 

Diagram of revised operation procedure 

 

 

Following safety stand-down, medical evacuation of injured person and appropriate discussion of the incident, the company 
took the following actions: 

♦  Banded  the  4m  x  20Te  SWL  round  sling  and  created  plan  to  use  two  tail  ropes  to  pull  the  round  sling,  avoiding  the 

occurrence of unhook; 

♦  Ensured all the divers understood about the change in work procedures. 

 
4  LTI Caused by Inadvertent Activation of Expired Line Throwing Device 

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman was seriously injured when inadvertently struck by a line throwing 
rocket.  The incident occurred when a search was made for a small diameter rope for use as a plumb line.  Since no suitable 
rope was easily available, a member of the crew decided, without consulting anybody else, that the small diameter line from 
an old rocket  assisted line throwing apparatus (LTA) could be used.   Whilst trying to  retrieve the line from the device, it 
slipped  from  the  crew  member’s  hands,  dropped  to  the  deck  and  unfortunately  went  off.    A  crew  member  was  working 
nearby and was inadvertently struck, causing a deep cut on his left leg near the shin.  

Line throwing apparatus 

Injured person’s shin 

 

 

An investigation by the company noted the following: 

♦  The LTA was uncontrolled and was not on any inventory list; 

♦  The LTA had no safety pin or markings indicating date of manufacture, operating instructions or expiry date; 

♦  There was inadequate control of spares and stock leading to a shortage of rope for the task in hand; 

♦  The crew member took no account of the possible risk to himself and others in handling an explosive device. 

The company made a number of recommendations particularly concerning pyrotechnic devices such as flares and rockets: 

♦  Pyrotechnics should be controlled items, stored in a safe place, and only used by appropriately trained personnel; 

♦  Pyrotechnics should be used only for the purpose for which they were intended or manufactured;  

♦  Expired or ‘out of date’ pyrotechnics should be disposed of according to local regulatory requirements, and vessel crew 

should be fully familiar with company procedures and requirements for disposal;  

The company made a number of further recommendations: 

♦  Better control of work and toolbox talks might have prevented this incident; 

♦  Vessel crew should be aware of vessel garbage management plan; 

♦  Control of spares should be such that appropriate quantities of parts and stock are available for everyday operations. 

5  Fire in Engine Room Workshop 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following Safety Flash regarding an incident in which there was a small fire 
onboard  within  the  engine  room  workshop.    The  fire  occurred  when  engineering  personnel  decided  to  conduct  welding 
operations in the engine room workshop without informing anybody.  The alarm was raised, the vessel emergency response 
team was mobilised and the fire was safely extinguished.  There were no injuries. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.42.pdf 

