AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/14 

Safety Flash 

  October 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Engine Room Flooding 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  the  engine  room  of  a  seagoing  vessel  was  flooded  to  a  level  of  two  metres 
above tank top (to just below the engine room floor plating). Had the flooding incident lasted a few minutes longer, serious 
machinery damage could have been the result. The incident occurred during ballasting operations, when the configuration of 
pumping from and to ballast tanks was altered. During this process the cover plate of the sea strainer was blown off. This 
resulted in seawater ingress into the engine room. Engine room personnel instructed the bridge officer in charge of ballasting 
to  stop  ballasting  operations  (without  mentioning  reasons).  As  per  company  procedure,  the  overboard  suction  valve  and 
overboard  discharge  valve  were  opened  to  ‘de-energize’  the  pumping  system.  This  worsened  the  situation  since  a  direct 
connection between open water and engine room was created. This was noticed by engine room personnel immediately and 
the bridge officer was instructed to close overboard valves. There was no damage and no injuries.  

Figures: showing flooding (left) and cover plate of sea strainer (right) 

   

 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  Root cause: malfunctioning of one of the actuators of the valves in the ballast pipelines caused the valve to close in 1.5 
– 2 seconds (normally 15 – 20 seconds). This created a pressure shock in the ballast system. Subsequently, this pressure 
shock caused the cover plate of the sea strainer to blow off;   

♦  The  actuator  of  the  valve  which  was  closing  in  1.5  –  2  seconds  was  replaced  by  vessel  crew  in  early  2014  without 

verification of the opening/closing time of the valve; 

♦  Root  cause:  communication  between  engine  room  personnel  and  bridge  personnel  was  not  sufficiently  detailed;  this 

resulted in incorrect actions being taken which caused a worsening of the situation;  

♦  Root  cause:  ballasting  procedure  of  manufacturer  was  not  followed.  The  recommended  procedure  described  that 

pump(s) should be stopped before operating valves in the ballast lines. This was not followed. 

Our member learnt the following lessons: 

♦ 

Introduced vessel-specific procedures for ballasting and added this instruction to the official document list of vessel; 

♦  Following the hierarchy of control, the company recognised it could not eliminate nor substitute the ballast process on 

board. Therefore, it focused on the following engineering controls by: 

− 

improving visual presentation for valve operations on the bridge to emphasize valve position and open lines in the 
ballast system 

 

♦ 

♦ 

− 

introduction of interlock system to eliminate simultaneous operations of valve(s) and pump(s). 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: engine, room, and flood): 

IMCA SF 11/05 – Incident 3: Engine room flooding;  

IMCA SF 12/13 – Incident 2: LTI: Crewman injured during opening of tanks. 

2  Dropped Object Incident   

A member has reported an incident in which an object of 100kg fell 2m onto a scaffold platform. The incident occurred in 
port during the removal of a 55t tensioning mechanism from a horizontal lay system (HLS) on board a vessel.  The tensioner 
was  pre-rigged  with  primary  rigging  to  the  main  crane  and  auxiliary  rigging  to  the  upper  side  of  the  horizontal  lay  system.  
The  strain  was  taken  on  the  rigging  to  allow  the  unbolting  of  the  tensioner  from  the  HLS.    Once  the  bolt  removal  was 
complete the deck foreman instructed the crane driver to take more load on the crane.  When the crane took more load on 
the primary rigging the rigging came into contact with the product guide bars and pushed a guide bar off the horizontal lay 
system. The guide bar weighed 100kg and fell 2m onto a scaffold platform on the HLS. There were no injuries.  

 

 

Figure 1: taken after the guide bar had been pushed off the 

Figure 2: guide bar 

horizontal lay system 

Our member was made a number of modifications to the design of the horizontal lay system, in order to prevent recurrence: 

♦  Limit the requirement for auxiliary rigging to install or remove a tensioner; 

♦  Fit end stops onto the guide bar slide guides to stop them being pushed off the HLS. 

Our member noted that all future lift plans or procedures with respect to the HLS should ensure that the guide bars are 
removed  before  installation/removal  of  a  tensioner,  or  securely  lashed  together  to  ensure  they  do  not  come  into  contact 
with any rigging. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: dropped object): 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 08/11 – Incident 2: Recent near miss incidents involving potential dropped objects;  

IMCA SF 06/13 – Incident 4: Near miss: dropped objects during lifting operations.  

3  Near Miss: Failure of Diving Helmet Communications Module   

A member has reported an incident where the communications module on a Kirby Morgan KM 37 diver’s helmet failed at 
the interface between the threaded section and the main module. The incident occurred during a dive to 12 msw. The diver 
was able to reduce the loss of air from his helmet by placing his hand over the partial opening and return to the surface in a 
controlled manner. The module did not fall out of the aperture in the helmet. There were no injuries. 

 

Figure: showing broken helmet communications module 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The module had never been removed from the helmet; 

♦  The helmet had been in storage for several years since purchase with minimal use; 

♦  Water temperature was less than 2°C; Depth: 12 msw; 

♦  No tool marks were found on the securing nut to suggest over tightening. 

 

The  failed  module  was  sent  to  the  supplier  for  inspection  and  analysis.  The  supplier  inspected  the  part  and  performed  in-
house  testing  of  off  the  shelf  inventory  overstressing  at  worst  case  levels.    It  was  reported  the  parts  withstood  extreme 
stress tests at elevated and sub-freezing temperatures and passed all inspection criteria.  The supplier found that failure of the 
module appeared to be an isolated case and referred the member to Kirby Morgan Bulletin #1 of 2009. 

The following actions were taken: 

hand; 

♦  Supplier  would  include,  in  checklists,  that  the  module  should  be  regularly  loosened  and  retightened  during  checks,  by 

♦ 

Inspection of all such communications modules - none found with potential failure indications, even in older helmets in 
more frequent use; 

♦  A recommended inspection/check process was initiated. 

4  Near Miss: Incident Involving Dry Bulk Pressure System 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding a near miss or potential incident involving control 
of work whilst carrying out live tests on a pressurised dry bulk cargo systems on board a vessel; this resulted in a ‘Stop the 
Job’ intervention. Whilst there were no injuries or damage caused, given that pressure vessels were involved, the potential 
was high.  

It was found that the root cause was lack of adequate control of work, and that lack of communication between the engine 
room and bridge staff was a contributory factor. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.35.pdf.    

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: dry, bulk, pressure): 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 09/12 – Incident 2: Near miss: cement tank hatch failure; 

IMCA SF 01/04 – Incident 3: Near-miss during connector pressure tests. 

 
5  Ruptured Hydraulic Hoses   

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  involving  the  rupturing  of  a  pair  of  hydraulic  hoses  on  a  vessel  crane.  The  incident 
occurred during a port call when the mid-ship crane was being used to move packaging from the main reel area to the deck. 
A hydraulic hose ruptured and oil was spilt to the main deck below. The majority of the hydraulic oil (20 litres) landed on the 
deck but approximately 500 ml of oil went into the sea.  

An  ‘all  stop’  was  initiated  and  the  spill  on  deck  was  immediately  cleared  up  using  a    Ship  Oil  Pollution  Emergency  Plan 
(SOPEP) kit. The following day another hose ruptured in a similar location and all oil was contained on deck. The relevant 
authorities were notified. 

Figures: showing damaged hoses (upper red arrow on left image indicates ruptured area) 

  

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The ruptured hoses were badly corroded;  

♦  The design or assembly of the hydraulic fittings had allowed water to accumulate around the neck of the fittings;  

♦  The collection of water had eroded parts of the hoses resulting in the ruptures; 

♦  Other hoses onboard were found to be in a similar state; 

♦  The inspection of the vessel crane hydraulic hoses was conducted by vessel crew and a third-party contractor. The most 
recent inspection had taken place four months previous to the incidents occurring.  It was found the crew and the third 
party inspection team had not removed the ‘denso’ tape wrapped around the hose fittings, thus the corrosion was not 
visible; 

♦ 

It  was  apparent  that  the  corrosion  on  the  hoses  had  occurred  over  a  long  period  of  time  and  this  should  have  been 
spotted by the inspection by vessel crew and contractor, and noted in their report. 

Our member immediately replaced the badly corroded hoses and undertook an investigation to ascertain why the contractor 
and  crew had not identified the corrosion during the previous inspection. It was found the ‘denso’ tape was not removed 
from hose fittings during these inspections and as a result the corrosion was not visible.  Removal of ‘denso’ tape from hose 
fittings is now required for all future inspections. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: hydraulic, hose, rupture): 

IMCA SF 05/05 – Incident 2: Pollution caused by burst hydraulic hose; 

IMCA SF 11/14 – Incident 5: Hydraulic hose failure caused collapse of heavy haulage trailer. 

Injured Party Struck by Tugger Wire Assembly 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  someone  was  struck  by  a 
tugger  wire  assembly,  requiring  subsequent  hospitalisation.  The  incident  occurred  when  a  vessel  was  deploying  a  15  Te 
anchor during a pre-lay operation. The rigging assembly parted and both tugger wires recoiled around the cargo barrier. The 
injured person was struck on the head and suffered head injuries. 

♦ 

♦ 

6 

 
The root causes of the incident lay in failure to properly identify and assess the risks of the particular task. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.34.pdf.  

