AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/13 

Safety Flash 

  May 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.      The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.   
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.   All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.   Where these are particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.   Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Substandard Nitrogen Quads Delivered to Shipyard 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  two  nitrogen  quads  were  delivered  in  very  poor  condition  to  a  vessel  in  a 
shipyard.    Following  delivery  the  quads  were  inspected,  and  observations  were  made  regarding  the  amount  of  corrosion 
around the necks and valve areas of the bottles.  The nitrogen quads were immediately quarantined and removed to a safe 
area of the yard to await collection by the supplier.    

Our member noted the following: 

  The quads were delivered by a company approved supplier; 

  The quads were delivered with a full certification pack.   

Our member drew the following conclusions: 

  The incident highlights the importance of checking ALL equipment upon arrival and before use to ensure that it is fit for 

purpose; 

  Certification documents ought not be used as proof that equipment is fit for purpose.  Always check equipment; 

 

If equipment is found to be in unsafe condition on delivery, this should be reported and the necessary precautions taken 
to ensure that the equipment is not used until the defect has been rectified or other equipment supplied; 

  Suppliers should also be audited (as required) to ensure that they have suitable management systems in place to provide 

fit for purpose equipment and services. 

Figure: Showing corrosion and poor condition of gas quads as delivered 

 

2  Small Boat Cradle Collapsed During Poor Weather Conditions  

A member has reported an incident in which a zodiac inflatable boat was dropped onto deck.  The incident occurred when a 
dive support vessel (DSV) was at anchor outside the offshore oilfield waiting on weather.  The wind picked up suddenly to 35 
knots and as a result the vessel began to roll violently.  This caused severe shock-load on the four securing ropes for the 

 
cradle  supporting  the  boat.    Two  of  the  ropes  (on  the  seaward  side)  snapped,  whereas  the  deck  side  ropes  were  still 
secured.  The vessel continued to roll violently and the small boat cradle slid from the stand and fell on the deck.  The two 
deck side ropes which were still securing the small boat caused it to flip/turn over during the fall.   

There were no injuries and no environmental damage.  The small boat sustained some damage.   

Figure: Showing zodiac inflatable boat after collapse of stand 

 

Our member took the following steps to prevent recurrence: 

  The securing mechanism was reviewed and modified;  

  Cargo lashing belt was introduced as additional securing means;  

  Additional skirting was fabricated and installed on the platform towards the deck-side as well; 

  Our  member  noted  that  appropriate  securing  of  equipment  and  cargo  against  vessel  movements  should  not  be 

neglected.   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure: Showing inflatable boat on stand after reconstruction 

3  Crane Wire Parting 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding the parting of a crane wire on an offshore vessel.  
This  was  partially  due  to  the  malfunction  of  the  crane  limiter  switch,  but  also  due  to  a  failure  to  check  that  all  the  safety 
devices were functional.   

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.11.pdf    

 
4  Crewman Injured – No Control of Work   

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which someone was struck on face 
and arm by debris under pressure, resulting in hospitalisation to remove particles from under their skin.  It was discovered 
that  there  had  been  no  control  of  work  whatsoever  in  place  –  no  Permit  to  Work,  no  isolations  or  barriers,  no  risk 
assessment or tool box talk.   

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.15.pdf. 

5  Fire Caused by Hot Work 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  small  fire  was  caused  by  hot  work  taking  place  on  the  deck  above.    The 
incident occurred when a repair was being performed by a sub-contractor on a steel plate in the forecastle area.  The job 
involved using an oxy-acetylene torch to remove an old corroded plate.  During this activity, the oxy-acetylene cutting of the 
plate  caused  heat  transfer  from  the  forecastle  deck  area  to  the  store-man’s  office  area  (located  directly  below  the  place 
where the hot work was being carried out).  As a result, glowing slag fell on the store-man’s chair, which caught fire.  There 
was no-one in the storeman's office at the time.  The fire detection equipment in the office caused the alarm to go off.  There 
were no injuries.   

Figure: Fire-damaged chair after the event 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

 

Immediate causes: 

- 

Fire watch location was not well planned by supervision; 

-  Melt slag felt on top of the store-man’s chair. 

  Root Causes: 

- 

- 

- 

Failure to control and conduct of safe work (permit to work planning failed); 

Failed check of the workplace; 

Inadequate risk assessment (warning about the smell of smoke in the store-man’s office was not investigated by 
the fire watcher). 

Our member took the following preventative and corrective measures: 

  Held discussion with all parties involved to ensure all understand their responsibilities; 

  Ensured that any spaces identified as at risk of heat transfer from hot work  are identified in the appropriate section of 

  Raised  awareness  of  correct  identification  of  adjoining  compartments/spaces  in  regard  to  hot  work  and  heat  transfer 

the job risk analysis beforehand;  

through bulkheads, decks, etc.;  

  Double check (second pair of eyes) to identify any deck penetrations to improve spatial awareness; 

  Ensure fire detection system is fully functional during hot work.    

 
6  Counterfeit Portable Fire Extinguishers 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published the following report regarding counterfeit portable fire extinguishers.  
The  USCG  has  become  aware  of  counterfeits  of  USCG  approved  portable  fire  extinguishers  ostensibly  manufactured  by 
approved suppliers serving a world-wide market.  These counterfeit extinguishers present a significant safety hazard.  Their 
capability  to  extinguish  a  fire  is  unproven;  they  may  be  charged  with  a  powdery  substance  that  is  not  a  fire  extinguishing 
agent, the pressure cylinder is not DOT approved, and the pressure gauge may not function or give false readings. 

The  USCG  strongly  recommends  that  vessel  owners  and  operators  inspect  their  equipment.    Those  suspecting  that  they 
have  counterfeit  extinguishers  should  contact  the  Coast  Guard  Office  of  Design  and  Engineering  Standards  immediately.  
Please provide a description of the suspect units, including if possible photographs showing full front, rear, and bottom views 
of the extinguishers, along with close-ups of all labels, and submit this information to typeapproval@uscg.mil  with a copy to 
anticounterfeiting@us.ul.com. 

Further  information,  including  useful  graphics  and  photographs  to  assist  with  identifying  the  counterfeit  equipment,  can  be 
downloaded from www.uscg.mil/tvncoe/Documents/safetyalerts/CounterfeitExtinguishers.pdf. 

 

