AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/13 

Safety Flash 

  July 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss - Falling Transponder on Main Deck   

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  transponder  came  into  contact  with  the  crane’s  sheave,  causing  the 
transponder to fall on deck. The incident occurred during lifting operations, which required overboarding a jumper and its 
spreader bar – both positioned on deck. The whole assembly was directly slung to the hook on the main line of the vessel’s 
crane (see Figure 1). The main line and the whip line were both equipped with a transponder that was positioned right above 
the headache ball and directly secured to the wire rope with two jubilee clips. 

Once the assembly was lifted off its stands, the length of the whip line was reduced from approximately 7m to 3m, so that it 
would not get tangled with the main line. The incident happened as the knuckle boom was folded to adjust the rigging. The 
surface  area  of  the  knuckle  boom  increases  when  folded  and  both  lines  are  drawn  in  as  a  result.  The  transponder  on  the 
whip line was caught up in the sheave, causing the transponder, which weighed approximately 4 kg, to fall from 30m to the 
deck. There were no injuries. The transponder sustained noticeable damage (see Figure 2). 

   

 

Figure 1: Spreader bar assembly 

Figure 2: Damaged transponder 

 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

grease build-up; 

been replaced; 

  The mechanical hook level alarm installed on the whip line was disconnected because it was deemed too sensitive to 

  The mechanical hook level alarm installed on the main line was not working because of corroded switches that had not 

  The above-mentioned switches were not waterproof; 

  No-one,  prior  to  or  during  the  operations,  spotted  the  two  transponders  that  were  on  both  lines  and/or  identified 

them as hazards associated with a risk of falling object; 

  The whip line had been put back into service after three months of unavailability due to a problem with calibration; 

  There was no specific procedure regarding the use of transponders on the crane’s lines; 

 

Existing company safety management system procedures for management of change were not followed. 

Our member took the following preventive actions: 

 

 

Ensured  personnel  fully  comply  with  existing  company  safety  management  system  procedures,  particularly  with 
reference to management of change; 

Ensured crane operators are fully aware of the workings of their cranes  – i.e. that the crane’s lines  are automatically 
drawn in when the knuckle boom is folded; 

  Removed unnecessary transponders from crane wires. 

Our member put procedures in place to: 

 

Ensure  that  the  mechanical  hook  level  alarm  installed  is  tested  each  time  the  crane  is  started,  and  that  this  test  is 
included in the vessel’s planned maintenance system (PMS); 

  Cover the use of transponders during lifting operations. 

2  LTI: Crewman Injured During Opening of Tanks 

A member has reported an incident in which someone suffered a head injury, when water escaped from a tank when it was 
opened. The incident occurred during opening of vessel ballast water tanks for ventilation prior to cleaning and inspection. 
The  wrong tank was opened; a tank containing ballast water (the majority of the volume of which was above the man-hole) 
was opened by mistake, and approximately 180 cubic metres of water flushed out of the tank. The person opening the tank 
was pushed aside by the flow of water and knocked against other structures, suffering head injuries as a result.  

Following  first  aid,  the  crewman  was  taken  to  hospital  for  treatment,  but  later  returned  to  the  vessel.  The  incident  was 
considered an LTI. Our member also considered the incident “high potential” as it could have easily resulted in a fatality.  

Figure: Showing damaged grating and manhole from starboard side. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure: Showing area against which crewman was pushed by flow of water. NB height from deck to the 

pipe is approximately 0.35m (red arrow) 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  There had been no risk assessment before starting the task; 

  No permit to work was obtained for the task; 

  There was insufficient familiarisation of persons involved in the task; 

  There was no proper communication with regard to which tanks were to be opened and when to open them; 

  All nuts were removed from manhole cover prior to breaking the seal. 

Our member drew the following lessons from the incident: 

Leave a minimum of bolts on the treads prior to breaking the seal of the manhole; 

Ensure personnel involved in a task have a full and common understanding of what is required before starting;  

Ensure personnel are aware that the job can be stopped if this is not the case;  

Identify requirements for permit to work, isolations and tool box talks before start of task. 

3 

Incidents of Failure of Jet Drives on Wind Farm Service Vessels 

A member has reported a number of incidents involving jet drives on wind farm service vessels.  

Incident 1: Loss of Jet Drive Control on Wind Farm Service Vessel  

A  wind  farm  service  vessel  lost  control  of  its  jet  drives.  The  incident  occurred  when  a  wind  farm  service  vessel  was 
underway returning to port from the wind farm. Control of the port jet was lost and the vessel veered heavily to port. The 
port jet was shut down and the vessel returned to base on one engine escorted by another wind farm service vessel.  

  An M6 size bolt, securing the steering feedback transducer plate to the end of the steering ram, had vibrated loose and 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

fallen off into the bilge; 

  This resulted in a loss of steering control of the unit. 

Our member took the following action and learnt the following lessons: 

  The steering feedback transducer plate was reconnected and LocTite or similar used on the nut and bolt; 

  The repair operation could have been conducted offshore without returning to port; 

  When  the  rams  are  disconnected  from  the  transducer  plate  for  maintenance  purposes,  the  nut  and  bolt  should  be 

secured with an agent like LocTite or similar to prevent the bolt from vibrating loose; 

  Wind farm vessel crews should have a thorough technical understanding of the vessels they are using. 

 

 

Figure: Transducer plate secured correctly to ram 

Figure:  Transducer  plate  secured  correctly  to  ram  transducer  plate 
unsecured and steering ram retracted 

Incident 2: Failure of Jet Drive on Start-up   

Before starting the jets, before starting the day’s operations, it was found that the starboard jet failed to respond. Initial fault 
finding  consisted  of  shutting  down  and  restarting  the  starboard  jet  and  changing  over  the  relays.  This  did  not  work.  An 
attempt  was  then  made  to  manoeuvre  using  the  local  solenoid  control  –  this  did  work.  Following  local  control,  the  jet 
operated  normally  on  all  control  systems  and  operations  were  resumed.  As  a  result,  the  vessel  was  45  minutes  late  for 
operations. 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  The gearbox had been maintained earlier in the week; 

  The jet had performed for 45 minutes since the gearbox was serviced; 

  Use of the local solenoid control restored the system to operation; 

  The cause of the incident was suspected air within the system.  

Our member recommended that: 

programme;  

  Knowledge  of  the  local  control  is  included  as  part  of  the  emergency  procedures  in  the  company  competence 

  Wind farm service vessel skippers should be aware of the possibility of using local control systems; 

  The use of local control systems should be part of routine fault finding. 

4  Wind Farm Service Vessel in Collision with Wind Turbine Foundation 

A member has reported an incident in which a wind farm service vessel collided with a turbine foundation, after failure of the 
vessel jet drive. The incident occurred after the vessel had disembarked passengers at the sub-station and had reversed away 
to  drift,  whilst  standing  by  for  the  next  assignment.  The  jets  were  disengaged  and  engines  left  running,  as  was  common 
practice.  Under  the  influence  of  currents,  the  vessel  drifted  towards  another  turbine  foundation  and  when  approximately 
30m  away,  the  vessel  coxswain/skipper  attempted  to  engage  the  jets.  At  this  moment  it  was  found  that  neither  jet  would 
engage. Several minutes were spent fault finding to no avail, after which the vessel coxswain/skipper assisted the deckhand 
with fenders.  The vessel collided with the foundation, causing a buckled frame and bent plate in the port quarter bulwark, 
but no damage to the foundation.  

Later  the  same  day,  the  problem  re-occurred  and  the  vessel  returned  to  port.  Since  that  time,  the  problem  had  not  
re-appeared. Client and office were only informed after the second failure, when the vessel was returning to port. 

 

Figure: Showing buckled frame and bent plate, as a result of collision between wind farm service vessel and turbine foundation 

During investigation, the following points were noted: 

 

It was common practice for wind farm vessels to be allowed to drift in field, whilst waiting for work; 

  There  was  no  guidance  from  the  wind  farm  operator  (the  client)  on  a  minimum  distance  of  approach  to  offshore 

 

  At the speed the wind farm vessel was drifting, 30m was not sufficient distance to allow enough time to re-start the jets 

structures while drifting; 

or to anchor; 

  The jet drives re-engaged, once they had been completely shut down and re-started. 

Our member drew the following lessons from the incident: 

 

 

 

Following  any  incident,  the  company  office  and  client  should  be  informed  immediately,  if  necessary  using  satellite 
telephone;  

Jet  drives  should  be  engaged  when  within  100m  of  an  offshore  structure,  unless  the  wind  farm  service  vessel  is  at 
anchor or tied off; 

Following  this  incident,  the  wind  farm  client  now  allows  wind  farm  service  vessels  to  tie  off  on  to  foundations  when 
waiting on work.  

5  Risks Associated with Pneumatic Hose Couplings - Update 

The National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority of Australia (NOPSEMA) has published 
an updated version of its Safety Alert 55, covering the risks of incorrectly assembled, or faulty, pressurised pneumatic (air) 
hose couplings.  

The revised alert can be downloaded from www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/publications/Safety-Alert-55-Rev-2.pdf  

