AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/06 

June 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Trapped Pressure Release Incident 

A  members  has  reported  a  trapped  pressure  release  incident  in  a  dive  system  transfer  chamber.    The  incident  occurred 
onboard a diving support vessel undergoing commissioning of its saturation diving system following a dry dock.  The system 
was compressed to an equivalent internal depth of 333 msw and then returned to ambient surface pressure. 

A saturation diver entered the dive system transfer chamber, less than an hour after the system had been returned to surface 
pressure, and decided to flush the toilet system as there was a strong smell of sewage.  On operating the bulkhead valve to 
evacuate the holding cylinder no movement of the contents was heard, so the diver assumed that there was no pressure in 
the system and opened the ball valve next to the WC.  In doing so he inadvertently operated the valves out of sequence.  
The external ball valve had not been checked and was in the closed position.  Trapped pressure inside the holding cylinder 
was then released into the chamber via the WC, back-flushing the contents of the holding cylinder – raw sewage – into the 
chamber  with  it,  covering  the  diver.    The  force  of  the  trapped  pressure,  which  could  have  been  as  much  as  30  bar,  was 
sufficient to lift the toilet seat and fracture it. 

The diver – following a shower and change of clothes – visited the medic, who confirmed no medical action was required. 

2  Serious Injury During Pipestalk Rolling Operation 

A member has reported an incident that occurred recently during planned, routine pipe stalk rolling operations at a spool 
base.  The incident resulted in serious injuries to one person. 

At a fabrication facility, lengths of pipe are welded into 1 km long pipe stalks, which 
are stored on pipe racks prior to spooling onto a pipelay vessel.  The pipe stalks can, 
where  required,  be  repositioned  by  rolling  them  across  the  pipe  racks.    This  is  a 
routine  operation,  involving  a  minimal  amount  of  lifting  at  the  mid-point  of  the 
pipe stalk to induce a rolling momentum. 

The injured person was assisting with planned pipe stalk rolling operations when he 
became  entangled  in  a  tag-line  that  subsequently  trapped  and  held  him  against  the 
rolling pipe stalk.  He was carried over the top of the rolling pipe stalk and crushed 
between that pipe stalk and the one adjacent to it. 

As a result, he sustained fractures to both legs and serious internal injuries.  First aid 
was administered on site and he was immediately transported to hospital. 

Investigation into the incident noted the following: 

  Although only a minimal amount of lifting at the mid point of the pipe stalk was 
involved,  this  activity  had  not  been  recognised  as  a  lifting  operation  and, 
therefore, the appropriate level of control and supervision had not been applied; 

  There was evidence that, while a safety management system was in place, the procedures and risk assessments used to 

control the work had not been adequate; 

  The task was being carried out by competent, experienced personnel, who had completed the task without harm many 
times before.  Nevertheless, there was evidence that the personnel involved were unaware of the risk assessments and 
procedures in place and worked to custom and practice, rather than to procedures. 

 

The company has noted the following lessons to be drawn from the incident: 

  Tag-lines are useful, often essential, attachments to assist in controlling a load.  However, all personnel should be acutely 
aware  of  the  potential  risk  of  snagging  or  entanglement  of  themselves  or  other  equipment  when  using  tag-lines  and 
ensure that they position themselves safely away from the load; 

  The same level of compliance with procedures; and awareness and control of risk should be applied to routine work as 
to  higher  risk,  and  non  routine  activities,  particularly  where  lifting  operations,  however  routine  or  low-level,  are 
involved. 

Safety Flash 

