AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/01 

November 2001 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Retrieval of Buoys 

In  October  1995,  IMCA  published  guidance  R  1/95  (now referred  to  as  IMCA  R  001)  referring  to  plastic  spherical  buoys, 
sometimes  know  as  ‘Grimsby’  buoys  or  ‘Neukleons’.    These  buoys  are  used  on  ROVs  and  other  umbilicals.    Safety  Flash 
09/01, issued this August, contained a reminder of the dangers inherent in the use of these buoys. 

We have now received a report of another incident, where an umbilical buoy burst after being on deck for approximately 
three hours, during which time the buoy was full of seawater.  This could have resulted in a serious injury. 

The company reporting the incident has recommended that, if these buoys are in use, safety face guards and gloves are to be 
worn during their retrieval and that all buoys are to be inspected prior to use and rejected if they have any pin holes, small 
cracks, etc. 

2  Electrical Fire in Engine Room 

A  member  has  reported  the  following  incident  which  occurred  onboard  one  of  its  vessels.    Due  to  a  sudden  power 
fluctuation, evidenced by flickering lights, the chief engineer went to the engine room to investigate and detected smoke, with 
a foul smell emanating from the step-down transformer. 

He panicked and shut off the main power breaker, causing the vessel to go adrift.  He used two DCP-type fire extinguishers 
to  douse  the  smoke.    He  tried  to  establish  the  cause  of  the  incident  and,  after  about  five  minutes,  he  bypassed  the 
transformer and resumed the power supply. 

The cause of the overheating of the transformer is under investigation.  It is suspected that the transfer insulation and cooling 
fan may be at fault. 

The member, in order to prevent reoccurrence of such an incident, has advised its personnel: 

that it is absolutely necessary to stay calm and assess the situation before deciding on the course of action; 

to conduct a periodic check of all overload relays, MCBs and fire/smoke detection systems for correct function; 

to report defects and ensure corrective action is taken. 

3  Fatality during Maintenance of Elevator Lift 

The  following  fatality,  which  occurred  during  a  routine  maintenance  task  on  an  elevator  lift  installed  on  a  rig,  has  been 
reported  to  IMCA.    The  task  being  undertaken  was  to  change  the  wire  that  raised  and  lowered  the  lift.    During  the 
operation, the securing arrangement used for this maintenance task failed and the lift fell over 100 feet to the bottom of the 
lift shaft.  The Barge Supervisor was on top of the lift when it fell and he died of his injuries. 

At present, the exact details of what happened have not yet been fully established, but the company concerned and the UK 
Health & Safety Executive (HSE) are conducting detailed investigations into the incident. 

The company concerned has undertaken to carry out the following actions: 

Maintenance activities are to be reviewed and risk assessed to ensure that there are adequate controls in place before the 
start  of  a  job.    This  may  mean  that  additional  assessment  procedures  will  need  to  be  drawn  up  for  more  complex 
activities; 

 

The  requirements  of  the  UK  Region  Permit  To  Work  (PTW)  procedures  are  to  be  studied.    Department  heads,  in 

conjunction with the OIM shall review and, if appropriate, reinforce the PTW system for maintenance activities. 

4  Need for Supplied Air in the Vicinity of Man Way during Nitrogen Purge 

We have been notified of the following incident, which occurred while a catalyst change-out was being undertaken.  The job 
was shut down for lunch, a nitrogen purge was on, the man way of the vessel was covered and there was no vacuum.   

The  supervising  engineer  of  the  project  and  a  junior  engineer  (who  had  not  previously  been  involved  with  the  project) 
entered  the  area,  proceeded  up  the  vessel  to  the  man  way  and  removed  the  board  covering  the  man  way.    The  junior 
engineer peered in and subsequently passed out due to a lack of oxygen.  He was taken to the hospital for examination and 
was subsequently released. 

The company concerned has implemented the following actions: 

Until  further  investigations  are  complete,  anyone  going  up  to  a  man  way  must  be  wearing  supplied  air  when  the  nitrogen 

A chain around the man way ladder must be posted, to prevent anyone from going up to the man way when project staff are 

purge is in process; 

on lunch or break. 

Additional actions are under consideration. 

5  Grit Hose Parting – Near-Miss Incident 

A  member  reports  that  while  a  diver  was  working  on  a  grit-blasting  operation,  the  grit  hose  parted  from  the  coupling 
connection on deck.  No one was injured and nothing was damaged. 

The LP compressor was shut down immediately and a safety meeting was conducted onboard to discuss the reasons for the 
parting and the precautions necessary to prevent reoccurrence. 

The company has set out the following checks to be made before use of the equipment: 

Check the condition of the hose for any physical damage; 

Check  all  hose-line  clamps  (including  gun  end  and  compressor  end)  for  tightness,  to  ensure  no  inadvertent  parting  of  the 

hose while in use; 

All hose connections are to be secured with safety rope to prevent a whiplash effect if parted; 

Insurance wire is to be fixed on all quick-release ‘Chicago’ couplings to prevent inadvertent parting of couplings while in use; 

All hose lines are to be anchored/secured with rope to fixed structures, again to prevent a whiplash effect if parted; 

One person is to be available to man the compressor and blast-pot at all times while work is in progress. 

6 

Improper Slinging of Cargo 

We have been passed the following, regarding an incident which resulted in cargo loss. 

While making a lift from a boat to the platform, the operator picked up a cargo basket and proceeded to swing away from 
the  boat.    While  swinging  the  basket,  the  cargo  suddenly  shifted  causing  the  O-ring  on  the  latch  side  of  the  hook  to  pull 
through the latch.  When the O-ring pulled through the latch, the two part sling came unhooked from the stinger and the 
basket dropped on one side resulting in dropping some of the cargo into the water. 

There were no injuries, but some of the cargo was lost. 

The company concerned has identified the following errors: 

The cargo basket slings were too short to be utilized with a single point hookup causing an unstable load and one ring to pull 

The minimum recommended sling angle (60 degrees) between the sling and the load was not maintained.  Actual angle was 

through the hook; 

about 35 degrees; 

The riggers on the boat failed to stop the job and used a poor  rigging technique (single line stinger hook); 

 

 

The crane operator failed to observe the rigging techniques prior to starting the lift. 

 
Figure 1: Similar cargo basket with incorrect sling angle. 

Figure 2:  Similar hook point with incorrect sling angle=hazard. 

 

he company concerned has initiated the following corrective actions: 

Utilisation of two-part slings when lifting similar cargo baskets; 

Maintenance by crane operators and riggers of a minimum angle of 60 degrees between the sling and the load; 

Reinforcement by supervisors of the necessity of stopping the job when proper rigging is not being used; 

Supervisors are to review the original safety flash with all crane operators and riggers during a safety meeting. 

The company has set out the following ‘rules of thumb’ for rigging: 

Use the same number of pickup slings as the number of o-rings on the load rigging; 

Each sling leg should be at least equal distance between the load pickup points (forming an equilateral triangle) regardless of 

whether using a single stinger or two legged hook-up.  This will always give the preferred 60 degree sling angle. 

X

60˚

60˚

X

Figure 3:  Rules of thumb 

60˚

 

7  Exploding Light and Smoke Marker 

A  member  has  reported  that  two  ‘Ikaros’  man-overboard  light  and  smoke  markers,  manufactured  by  Hansson  Pyrotech, 
were  returned  from  one  of  its  ships  to  its  shore-based  workshops.    The  units  had  been  stored  on  a  pallet  and  a 
storeman was in the process of moving each unit to another location. 

As he moved one of the units, it exploded with a loud bang, resulting in parts of the assembly shooting across the room.  
Fortunately he was not struck by flying fragments nor was he otherwise injured.  The smoke itself did not activate in the 
explosion, but instead the smoke powder was widely dispersed.  

 

The company’s investigations identified that: 

The storeman had not released the pin or moved any trigger mechanisms to activate the unit; 

The safety pin was still in the unit when the parts were recovered; 

The unit had been subjected to pressure build up from the way it had been torn apart rather than by normal activation of the 

smoke system; 

The unit was still within its safety bracket when it was moved. 

The unit was subsequently returned to suppliers for further examination and, although it is not conclusive, they have stated 
that  the  unit  may  not  have  had  the  safety  pin  fitted  correctly,  thereby  allowing  the  detonator  to  fire  but  preventing  the 
correct release of the smoke capsule.  The resultant pressure build up caused the unit to explode rather than flare off the 
smoke. 

As this event followed within just a week of IMCA releasing a safety flash on another incident involving Smoke flares which 
did cause serious injury, (Safety Flash 12/01), the company was concerned that there was a fault with these devices which 
could  have  caused  further  injury.    Dialogue  with  the  manufacturers  and  UK  marine  authorities  is  ongoing  to  further 
investigate such events.  The two manufacturers (the previous notice concerned a Pains Wessex unit) are concerned that 
there could be a fault with their units, but their responses have been guarded.   

Personnel should be made aware that at least two unexplained incidents have occurred and to avoid handling such devices 
whenever  possible  for  inspection  purposes.    If  they  are  to  be  transported,  it  should  be  ensured  that  the  manufacturers’ 
instructions are followed exactly and that the safety pin is correctly fitted. 

8  Fatality involving Offshore Drilling Pipe Rack Fingers 

We  have  been  passed  the  following  safety  alert  issued  by  the  US  Minerals  Management  Service.    Recently,  while  two 
roustabouts were positioning a stand of pipe into a pipe rack finger in the derrick, the pipe rack finger fell to the rig floor, 
killing  one  roustabout  and  injuring  the  other.    The  nine-stand  derrick  finger  weighed  approximately  65 lbs  and  fell 
approximately 90 feet.  Preliminary indications are that the finger fell as the result of the failure of a weld near the base of the 
finger. 

Although the accident is currently under investigation by MMS, with an official report to be issued at a later date, the above 
facts and the potential for similar occurrences have prompted this alert. 

MMS  recommends  that  all pipe  rack fingers  currently in use  and those  scheduled  for  use  be  inspected  for the purpose  of 
verifying  their  structural  integrity.    At  the  conclusion  of  MMS’s  investigation  of  the  accident,  the  issuance  of  an  additional 
Safety Alert with further recommendations is possible. 

9  Winch Incident 

A member has reported that one of its vessels was trenching, during which time the ship was told to hold present speed with 
the tow wire payed in at the same time.  There was no facility to spool the wire onto the drum accurately – personnel were 
placed adjacent to the tow wire and operated a valve using a nylon rope.  This could have resulted in a serious injury and 
damage to equipment. 

The company involved has instructed crews that the winch is to be operated remotely and, if feasible, cameras are to be used 
in hazardous areas.  The ship’s speed should also be taken into consideration. 

10  MSA Surety Sure-Stop™ Shock Absorbers 

Members  should  be  aware  of  the  following  ‘Stop  Use  &  Recall  Notice’ issued  by  Mine  Safety  Appliances  Company  (MSA).  
The full list of products involved is available on request from the IMCA office. 

 

Mine Safety Appliances Company. P.O. Box 426 .Pittsburgh, PA 15230 

Telephone: (412) 967-3000  

 

 

 

 

Writers Direct Dial No. 

Stop Use & Recall Notice 

Concerning MSA Surety Sure-Stop™ Shock Absorbers 

Manufactured from May through October of 2001 

Immediate Attention Required 

October 14, 2001 

 

 

 

 

 

To: 

All  users  of  MSA  Surety  lanyards  and  fall  protection  systems  using  the  Sure-Stop 
shock absorber 

 
MSA  is  currently  investigating  a  reported  incident  involving  an  MSA  Surety  Sure-Stop  lanyard.  
Our initial findings revealed that the lanyard was improperly manufactured. Although it appeared to 
be  functional,  it  provided  no  fall  arrest  protection  to  the  user.  This  notice  is  directed  to  all 
purchasers of products that potentially could also contain this manufacturing error. MSA asks that 
you  carefully  review  this  notice  and  immediately  remove  from  service  all  affected  fall 
protection components. 
 
Upon examination of the lanyard involved in this incident, we found that there was an error in the 
stitching that secures one end of the shock absorber to the remainder of the lanyard. Since this joint 
is glued in preparation for applying the stitches and the shock absorber sleeve covers this area, this 
lanyard  appeared  functional.  Even  if  the  user  tugged  sharply  on  the  lanyard,  the  assembly  would 
still have appeared secure. However, a lanyard in this condition is not functional and provides no 
fall arrest protection to the user. 
 
This notice involves all MSA Surety Sure-Stop shock absorbers and components that use the Sure-
Stop  shock  absorber.  This  includes  the  following  MSA  Surety  fall  protection  products.  See  the 
attached list for the MSA Surety part numbers identifying these products:  
  MSA Surety Sure-Stop lanyards 
  MSA Surety Gravity harnesses with integral Sure-Stop shock absorbers 
  MSA Surety Sure-Grab rope grab/fall arrester 
  Certain kits containing the MSA Surety Sure-Stop shock absorber 
 
As  indicated  above,  this  notice  affects  only  those  MSA  Surety  Sure-Stop  shock  absorbers 
manufactured  from  May  through  October  of  2001.  It  does  not  affect  MSA  Surety  products 
manufactured  outside  this  time  period  or  any  products  labeled  “Surety  Manufacturing  &  Testing 
LTD.” 
 
The  manufacturing  date  applies  to  the  shock  absorber  only  and  does  not  apply  to  the  complete 
system or other system components. 
 
Through our investigation we discovered three units that were not stitched in the May and June time 
period.  As  a  precaution,  we  are  including  units  manufactured  in  July,  August,  September,  and 
October as subject to this notice. Based on several factors, we are confident that MSA Surety Sure-

Stop  shock  absorbers  manufactured  outside  the  specified  time  period  as  well  as  products  labeled 
“Surety Manufacturing & Testing LTD.” do not have this condition and may continue to be used. 
 
The following outlines the steps you need to take immediately: 
 
1.  Locate Sure-Stop components: 

Locate all of the above listed fall protection components that use a Sure-Stop shock absorber. 
 

2.  Remove affected shock absorbers from service: 

Inspect  all  Sure-Stop  shock  absorbers  to  determine  the  date  of  manufacture.  The  date  of 
manufacture is located on the label affixed to the shock absorber sleeve (see diagram below). If 
this date is within the affected range or if the date cannot be determined, the shock absorber is 
subject to this notice and must be removed from service. As a reminder, this notice applies only 
to  MSA  Surety  Sure-Stop  shock  absorbers  and  does  not  apply  to  products  labeled  “Surety 
Manufacturing & Testing LTD.” 
 

 

 

3.  Contact MSA to arrange for inspection: 

Contact  MSA  Customer  Service  to  make  arrangements  for  the  return  and  inspection  of  all 
affected  products.  Customers  in  Canada  should  call  1-888-396-1067.  Customers  in  the  United 
States should call 1-800-MSA-2222. 
 
The  equipment  used  for  the  inspection  will  not  require  disassembly  of  the  shock  absorber, 
however  it  will  be  conclusive  as  to  whether  the  stitching  is  present.  We  will  affix  a  green 
adhesive  label  around  the  shock  absorber  to  identify  inspected  shock  absorbers.  The  label  will 
read “Accepted for Use”. If we find that the stitching is not present, we will replace the system 
component  containing  the  shock  absorber.  All  replacement  items  will  have  a  label  pack  with 
specifications  and  warnings  attached.  The  original  or  replacement  products  will  be  express 
shipped to you within three working days of our receipt of your product. 
 

We apologize for the inconvenience this situation may cause you. However, we are confident that 
our corrective measures appropriately address this safety concern. If you have any questions, please 
feel  free  to  contact  MSA  Customer  Service  toll-free  at  1-888-396-1067  (Canada)  or  1-800-MSA-
2222 (United States). Thank you. 
 

Very truly yours, 
 
 
Charles J. Seibel, Jr. 
Manager of Product Safety 

