AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/08 

June 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Catastrophic Failure of Vessel Main Crane Wire 

A member has reported a serious incident onboard a vessel where the main hoist wire rope of the main crane parted whilst 
deployed subsea.  The vessel crane was involved in operations in which a 20 tonne clump weight was suspended from the 
crane main hoist wire.  The water depth at the location was approximately 1600m.  It is not known to what depth the crane 
was deployed at the time of failure though it is believed there could have been in excess of 1400m of wire rope deployed. 

The  crane  was  a  pedestal  crane  articulated  box  jib  with  active  heave  compensation  and  had  been  in  operation  for 
approximately two years. 

Immediate investigation identified the failure point of the wire rope to have been at the second sheave of the knuckle boom.  
Subsequent  inspection  of  the  sheave  has  identified  significant  damage  that  would  be  consistent  with  the  sheave  failing  to 
rotate during the operation of the crane, and the resultant wear on the wire rope is potentially the cause of the rope failing. 

The crane was operating with the heave compensation engaged at the time of the failure. 

It is recommended that members operating vessels with cranes of this type carry out regular inspection of crane sheaves to 
identify any signs of wear that would indicate a potential failure of the sheaves to operate as designed.  Members operating 
cranes with active heave compensation are recommended to check sheave integrity and visibly check rotation of all sheaves. 

Photograph shows the 
wear in the crane 
sheave that has 
potentially caused the 
wire rope to fail 
 

 

 

 

2 

Incorrect Lifting Equipment Used 

Deck crew were lifting a full 200l (40 gallon) drum of Oceanic HW 443 (ethylene glycol) with the crane using a cargo strap 
drum  lifter.    As  the  drum  was  being  lifted  over  some  deck  equipment  it  slipped  out  of  the  span  set  type  drum  lifter  and 
dropped approx 6m to the deck.  No one was in the area under the drum when it slipped out.  The top of the plastic drum 
split and 40-45l of the fluid within spilled on to the deck.  Shipboard oil pollution emergency plan (SOPEP) equipment was 
deployed and the spill contained to the immediate vicinity.  No fluid was lost overboard. 

IMCA does not have details of the risk assessments, lift plans or toolbox talks, all of which could have identified the potential 
hazards, but the member’s further investigation revealed that the following factors were contributory to the incident: 

♦  Poor  choice  of  drum  lifting  device  –  a  barrel  span  set  lifting  strop  designed  for  lifting  metal  drums  was  used  to  lift  a 

plastic one with sides that curved in slightly towards the lid which allowed the drum to slip out of the strop; 

♦  There was a change in the lift plan without a reassessment of hazards; 

♦  Lack of knowledge of the correct applications for this type of drum lifting gear. 

Members  are  recommended  to  ensure  that  personnel  are  fully  capable  of  identifying  and  using  the  correct  drum  lifting 
equipment. 

 
Plastic drum with curved sides with 

barrel span set lifting strop – 

poor choice as intended for metal drums 

 
Metal drum showing intended use of 

barrel span set lifting strop 

Plastic drum with curved sides held 

securely in appropriate lifting equipment 

 

 

 

