AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/14 

Safety Flash 

  August 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  High Potential Stored Energy Incident: Inner Buoyancy Module Clamp Failure During Removal   

A member has reported an incident in which a clamp failed, allowing four objects to be ejected in various directions within 
the worksite. One of the objects struck a rigger on the back. The incident occurred during riser recovery using a Vertical Lay 
System (VLS).  As part of the riser recovery process various ancillary  items  were removed from the riser prior to it being 
spooled through a tensioner system to a storage reel. Among the items to be removed were riser buoyancy modules which 
consist of two outer shells and an inner clamp.  

During this recovery process, the incident occurred  during removal of the final inner clamp. As a clamp securing strap was 
being cut, it failed unexpectedly causing the four inner parts of the clamp to fly off in various directions. 

Fortunately there were no significant injuries; however there was clearly potential for  two or more persons to  have been 
seriously injured.   

Figure 1: typical set up immediately prior to cutting band securing inner clamp 

 

 

Figure 2: one of four blocks that make up 
inner clamp, each approx. 20cm x 25cm x 

35cm and weight circa 6 kg. 

 

 

 

Figure 3: screen capture from a camera shows the blocks being ejected from the clamp arrangement on the riser. (yellow circles 

indicate the moving blocks) 

Our members’ on-going investigation has thus far revealed the following: 

  Recent changes to the methodology for removing the clamp were not subject to a Management of Change process; 

  These changes were not seen as significant enough to warrant the Management of Change process; however the changes 

introduced hazards which had not been risk assessed; 

  The sling fitted below the clamp was over tensioned causing an upward force to be applied and ultimately the clamp to 

fail unexpectedly; 

  The  change  to  use  the  sling  to  stop  the  clamp  falling  to  deck  once  cut  was  perceived  as  an  improvement  but  the 

potential risks introduced by this change were not considered. 

Our member noted that although this task (removing buoyancy modules) had been undertaken without incident hundreds of 
times during this year alone, the incident acted as a reminder of the need to guard against complacency, remain vigilant at all 
times and remain aware of our surroundings.  

If  there  are  any  doubts  about  the  operation  take  the  time  to  stop  work  and  reassess  the  situation.  Any  changes  to 
procedures should be subject to the Management of Change process regardless of how minor they may initially appear. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Reassessed the availability of task procedures and risk assessments; 

  Checked on how well crews understood the above and how they reflect the way the job is actually being carried out; 

  Ensured  that  when  changes  are  made  to  improve  how  a  task  is  carried,  that  all  possible  negative  effects  are  fully 

considered; 

  Ensured that during development of new procedures, adequate consideration is given to getting input from end users. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents involving the sudden and unplanned release of stored energy 
(key words: released, stored, energy): 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 15/08 – Incident 1: Crew member injured during ROV maintenance; 

IMCA SF 17/08 – Incident 3: Stored energy – injury sustained whilst removing metal straps; 

IMCA SF 07/14 – Incident 2: Injury caused by movement of wire rope under tension.  

 
2  Near Miss: Incorrect Length Retaining Screws Fitted on Divers Helmet 

A member has reported a case of incorrect length retaining screws being found fitted to an Ultrajewel 601  diver’s helmet, 
exhaust  valve  cover  assembly.  This  was  discovered  by  vessel  crew  carrying  out  maintenance  on  a  newly  received  17C 
Ultrajewel 601 helmet. The jewel cover (Item 17, Part Number: DM022), retaining  screws (Item 18, Part Number: FB240) 
had been cut down in length and as a result did not give the required thread engagement. The correct length of the screw 
was 35mm as indicated within the part description column.  

Following the incident an inspection of the screws revealed that three of the four screws fitted had been cut back to varying 
lengths. The loss of thread certainly severely reduced the amount of thread available to satisfactorily clamp the exhaust valve 
cover assembly together. Loosening of the screws during use and the eventual separation of the  jewel cover assembly could 
have caused a serious incident. 

It is yet unknown how modified screws found their way into this location. All technicians maintaining diving equipment should 
be  trained  and  competent  personnel.  Any  technician  who  regularly  maintains  during  equipment  will  understand  fully  the 
importance of the jewel exhaust valve integrity during operation and will also be very familiar with the required grip range of 
the screws involved. 

 

 

Figure 1: showing screws highlighted in red 

Figure 2: screws of varying lengths 

Our member noted the following lessons: 

  Only use correct screws when maintaining life support equipment and as supplied by the equipment manufacturer;  

  Ensure that any held stock of the screw is adequately controlled to prevent migration into other stocked item locations 

and that storage bins or bags are clearly marked with the manufacturer’s part number; 

  Only trained and competent personnel should be maintaining life support equipment; 

  Never modify manufacturer supplied parts. 

 Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: helmet, fitting, incorrect, threads, modified): 

IMCA SF 11/05 – Incident 2: Near-miss during diving operations; 

 

 

IMCA SF 02/07 – Incident 3: Kirby Morgan safety bulletin – helmet shell repair caution and incident 4 divex hse alert – valve 
seat retainer – (both pertaining to inappropriate modification of divers helmets). 

 
3  LTI: Trip Incident 

A member has reported an incident in which  a  crew member fell over a trip hazard  on deck and broke both elbows as a 
result. The incident occurred on a vessel in dock. The injured person was walking towards the stern area to assist the other 
team  members  with  the  next  task.  En  route,  he  attempted  to  step  over  a  cargo  strap.  His  foot  caught  on  the  strap;  he 
tripped, lost balance and fell forwards, hitting the deck. He instinctively raised his arms in an attempt to lessen the impact of 
the fall, which resulted in him sustaining two broken elbows. 

  There were no barriers in place or marker tape to highlight the hazard. Additionally, there was a safe route around the 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

hazard which could have been taken; 

highlighted individually;  

  Although trip hazards, generally, were highlighted in the Risk Assessment and in the Toolbox Talk, this hazard was not 

  Notwithstanding the lack of barriers and with a safe alternative route available, this incident included behavioural based 
safety characteristics, with two crew members choosing to step over the cargo strap, rather than take the safe route. A 
second  crew  member  stepped  over  the  strap,  just  before  the  injured  person  did,  and  was  uninjured.  Lack  of  an 
accident/incident does not demonstrate adequate control.  

Our member noted the following lessons: 

  There were numerous failures, omissions and deliberate actions that led to the incident: 

Inadequate  planning/risk  assessment  –  without  a  cordon  or  other  appropriate  barriers/markers,  this  hazard 
presented an obvious risk, which was not specifically identified. Failure to adequately identify all hazards can result in 
accidents 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Inadequate safety controls/warning signs 

Lack of awareness/perception of risk 

Lack of attention/due care/poor work practice 

Poor decision-making/judgement 

Lack of adequate Toolbox Talk, Risk Assessment and Hazard Identification.  

Crews  should  remember  that  even  hazards  that  seem  to  present  a  trivial  risk  can  result  in  serious  injury,  unless  they  are 
adequately controlled. 

Figure: showing deck and cargo strap 

 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident (key words: tripped, deck): 

 

IMCA SF 04/09 – Incident 2: Hand injury caused when worker tripped over hazard. 

 

 
4  LTI: Trip Incident during Routine Task   

A member reported an incident which someone tripped over, fell and was injured whilst working on the deck of a vessel. 
The incident occurred during work on the rear skid of the backfill plough on the starboard side of the vessel. The injured 
person required something to kneel on. He proceeded to walk forward on the deck from the aft of the vessel towards the 
deck skip. He then tripped over a 20Te pad eye, lost his balance and fell over, landing on his right shoulder and arm. The 
injured person was taken to the vessel hospital; the vessel returned to port to allow the injured person to be transferred to 
a shore-side hospital for further treatment. 

Our  member  noted  that  this  was  the  second  serious  (LTI  level)  trip  incident  that  had  occurred  on  its  vessels  in  recent 
weeks, and that there had been an alarming rise in incidents causing injury to personnel engaged in normal routine tasks. 

Figure: showing deck where injured person tripped 

 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

 

 

It  has  been  identified  that  the  pad  eye  was  not  actually  required  until  the  next  interim  mobilisation,  and  hence  the 
incident could have been prevented; 

Inadequate planning/risk assessment – without a cordon or other appropriate barriers/markers, this hazard presented an 
obvious risk, which was not specifically identified. Failure to adequately identify all hazards can result in accidents; 

 

Inadequate safety controls/warning signs; 

  Lack of awareness/perception of risk; 

  Lack of attention/due care/poor work practice. 

Our member drew the following conclusions: 

 

In  this  instance  there  was  a  lapse  of  attention  while  doing  something  completely  routine  which  had  been  done  many 
times before, except that this time, the lapse had consequences; 

  The key lesson is that we can never be complacent; otherwise, the ever present hazards on our worksites will catch 

us out; 

 

It is important that we all take personal responsibility for our own safety and ensure that we  do not put ourselves or 
others ‘in the line of fire’; 

  Active supervision and intervention must be at the forefront of our daily activities; 

 

It is essential that everyone: 

  Remains pro-active and maintains a clear focus on hazard identification and accident prevention 

  Uses their own ability to be aware of the situation round about them and look where we place  our feet and where 

we put our hands; 

  The importance of focus on ‘routine work’ – where many incidents are occurring. 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident (key words: tripped, deck) 

 

IMCA SF 04/09 – Incident: 2 Hand injury caused when worker tripped over hazard. 

5  High Potential Dropped Object Incident 

A member reported an incident in which tools were dropped from height. The incident occurred during pick up of engineers 
from a wind turbine tower. A wind farm workboat was ‘pushed up’ against a turbine to collect two technicians, who were 
descending  the  tower.  As  they  did  so,  a  ratchet  and  two  sockets  fell  from the  work pouch  of  one  of  the technicians,  and 
landed on the on the bow/deck of the vessel. The ratchet – weighing 0.5kg – and sockets fell approximately 15m and landed 
centimetres from the crewman on board the vessel. There were no injuries and the technician then continued his descent 
down the ladder to board the vessel.  All persons were wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE). 

Our member notes the following:  

to make his descent; 

  The technician was carrying tools unsecured in his pocket and subsequently the tools fell out of his pocket as he began 

  The technician should not have been carrying tools on his person whilst descending the ladder but instead should have 

put all tools in the bags provided to be winched up or down by the crane; 

  There  had  been  no  checks  made  by  the  technicians  to  establish  whether  or  not  tools  were  being  carried  about  their 

person before descending the ladder on the wind turbine tower. 

Use of the DROPS calculator (see www.dropsonline.org) suggested that had these falling objects hit the crewman, it would 
have resulted in a major injury and hospitalisation.  

Our  member  recommended  that  ‘buddy  checks’  are  made  to  check  for  loose  objects  and  correct  use  of  PPE  before 
technicians disembark onto vessels. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident where someone lost his life because he carried tools and equipment 
whilst using a vertical ladder: 

 

IMCA SF 02/14 – Incident 2: Fatality in ballast water tank – working at height in a confined space. 

Members may wish to encourage circulation of the following safety promotional material: 

 

 

IMCA SPP 04 – Avoiding dropped objects; 

IMCA SPC 12 – Avoiding dropped objects. 

6  Disposal of Pyrotechnics 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  a  discarded  marine  flare 
ignited at a depot where ship’s garbage is sorted out. Fortunately on this occasion there was no injury to personnel involved 
but some damage was done to the conveyor belt. 

Members  are  reminded  that  flares  and  other  special  wastes  should  not  be  disposed  of  within  the  ship’s  waste  receptacles 
provided  by  the  port.  Disposal  of  Ship’s  flares  or  any  Marine  pyrotechnic  should  only  be  arranged  through  an  approved 
provider for such services.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.32.pdf. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident (key words: pyrotechnics) 

 

IMCA SF 13/12 Incident 4: LTI caused by inadvertent activation of expired line throwing device. 

7  Lifting and Rigging Plans 

The  Australian  National  Offshore  Petroleum  Safety  and  Environmental  Management  Authority  (NOPSEMA)  published  the 
following safety flash regarding  the importance of lifting and rigging plans in safe lifting.  Recent NOPSEMA investigations of 
dangerous occurrences  during non-routine lifting and rigging activities, which resulted  in dropped objects and failed  rigging 
equipment, have identified a trend in the absence of effective lifting and/or rigging plans for an operation or partial completion 
of a plan which was considered ineffective. 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents in which inadequate lift planning was a contributory factor: (key 
words lift, plan, planning): 

IMCA SF 17/08 – Incident 4: Failure of webbing strop during lifting operations; 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 4: Near miss: diver working under suspended load; 

IMCA SF 10/13 – Incident 1: High potential near miss – lifting equipment failure. 

Members are encouraged to reiterate the importance of lifting planning to their personnel. Further information on lifting and 
lift plans can be found from IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/alert/Safety-Alert-59-Lifting-and-Rigging-Plans.pdf. 

 

 

 

 

