AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/11 

Safety Flash 

July 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Reliance on Crane Limits Caused Crane Damage and Dropped Objects   

A member has reported an incident in which a crane was damaged and objects fell to the deck in the vicinity of personnel.  
The  incident  occurred  when  a  crane  operator,  whilst  attempting  to  stow  the  block  during  the  hours  of  darkness,  had 
difficulties in seeing it due to poor lighting conditions and the boom angle of the crane. Consequently, the crane operator 
relied on his upper crane limits to stop the block.  The upper limit switch failed to operate due to a technical fault and the 
wire socket was pulled into the sheave causing damage to the sheave, wire and rope guard. Sheared bolt heads from the rope 
guard then fell to deck in the vicinity of personnel below. 

The  crane  operator  then  immediately  lowered  the  block  to  position  where  he  could  cancel  the  alarms  which  were  now 
sounding. This action itself could have released further potential dropped objects which may have been held in place by the 
block. 

An investigation noted the following points: 

  The incident took place during a routine task and was considered low risk, but had the potential for a fatality or serious 
permanent injury had a larger component fallen and struck any of the personnel below.  Additionally, there could have 
been a substantial impact on the project or vessel schedule with the crane being out of service for a long period of time; 

  A significant contributory factor in this incident was the failure of the crane upper limit switch to automatically stop the 
wire socket well in advance of the rope guard and sheave.  However, the crane operator failed to perceive the risk of 
‘two blocking’ the crane even when faced with poor visibility of the boom tip, and relied upon the limit switch to safely 
stow the block; 

  The lighting conditions, boom angle and poor visibility should have prompted the crane operator to request assistance 
from the deck crew. As soon as the incident had occurred, the situation should have been assessed prior to lowering the 
block and possibly releasing any potential dropped objects. 

Actions taken included: 

is poor or restricted; 

  Highlighting the fact that reliance on crane limits should not be the primary method for stowing the block when visibility 

  Banksmen should be in attendance to give the crane operator assistance when stowing the block, and reference to this 

should be made be on the toolbox talk form for this task; 

  Crane  operators  should  ensure  that  all  limits  are  checked  at  the  correct  intervals  in  accordance  with  manufacturer’s 

instructions. 

 

2  Galley Fryer Fire  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  fire  occurred  during  routine  cleaning  and  operation  of  a  twin  vat  deep  fat 
fryer onboard a vessel.  The night shift galley team were given the task of cleaning a twin vat deep fat fryer.  This task was 
carried out by them, however on completion only one of the twin vats was refilled with oil.  This fact was not communicated 
to  the  day  shift  galley  team.    The  day  shift  team  were  required  to  use  the  fryer  shortly  after  starting  work,  and  it  was 
switched on by one of the stewards without any pre-start checks being carried out.  Shortly after the fryer was switched on a 
small fire started in the left-hand (empty) vat, which was quickly extinguished by the cook.  There were no injuries and little 
damage occurred.  

Galley deep fat fryer 

 

  The risk assessment did not identify the risk of fire if the unit was switched on without oil being at the required level in 

The incident was investigated and the following was noted: 

  No procedure existed detailing that the fryer should be refilled after cleaning; 

the vat; 

  The galley team shift handover was inadequate; 

  The galley team had inadequate knowledge of the fryer operation;  

  The unit was routinely being switched on at the main isolation point, despite there being two thermostatic controls to 

operate the vats independently of one another; 

  Not all galley staff had the confidence to tackle the fire, and had not attended recent emergency drills; 

  This was the second deep fat fryer fire on a company vessel in the previous six months, both having similar causes. 

It was noted that a fire risk with deep fat fryers will always exist where personnel are not adequately trained in the correct 
operation and maintenance of such equipment.  It was also noted that key errors were made where the unit was left without 
oil in one vat and then switched on with no check made that it was functioning correctly, and that there  were no control 
measures in place for the cleaning of the fryer. 

The following actions weere outlined: 

their safe operation and maintenance;  

  Ensure that the processes and procedures concerning the fryers are suitable and that sufficient controls are in place for 

  Ensure that the risk assessment for the fryers and galley equipment is suitable and sufficient, and understood by all;  

  Ensure that all the galley staff have been fully familiarised with all the galley equipment and fully understand the operation 

and risks for each;  

  Ensure that all members of the galley team are regularly trained in emergency requirements. 

 
3  Shackle in Rigging Assembly Below Required Safe Working Load (SWL) 

A member has reported that during a recent a recent spot check on a lifting bridle it was identified that a 17T shackle had 
been fitted instead of a 30T shackle.  The preassembled lifting bridle included 3 x 30T shackles (Crosby G2140) and 1 x 17T 
(Crosby G2130) instead of 4 x 30T shackles.  The certificate for the 17T shackle was cross checked against the identification 
number on the attached tag plate and showed the shackle SWL as 30T.  The shackle was removed and replaced with a 30T 
shackle (30T working load limit (WLL) embossed). 

Although the shackles are almost identical in size, differences in the material grades determine the WLL.  Both the material 
grade and WLL are embossed on every shackle.  It appears that an error was made during the certification process by the 
supplier where a 17T shackle had been certified (ID tag attached with common certificate number) as part of a batch of 30T 
shackles. 

This unsafe condition reinforces the requirement to conduct a pre-use inspection of lifting equipment prior to commencing 
the lift.  

Different shackles with working load limits embossed 

 

 

 

4  Near Miss:  Personnel Almost Caught Between Crane House and Scaffold Pipe 

A member has reported an incident in which someone was almost caught between a crane housing and a scaffold pipe.  The 
incident occurred when a non-destructive testing (NDT) inspector was conducting an inspection at the stern of the crane, 
outside on the roller level.  The access was from the scaffold around the crane.   The inspector was positioned at a beam, 
behind a vertical scaffold pole.  He  had  just finished the inspection of the welds and stepped back from the crane  housing 
onto the scaffold platform when the crane started slewing.  A deck supervisor spotted the inspector on the scaffold platform 
and asked him what he was doing.  Immediately the deck supervisor ordered the crane driver to stop the crane.  Had the 
crane started to slew earlier, then he could have been caught between the crane housing and the scaffolding pipe. 

 

Site of incident 

The following direct causes to the incident were identified: 

  The crane operator was not informed at the start of the work; 

  There were inadequate guards or barriers;  

  Log out tag out procedures were not applied. 

Subsequent to further investigation the following points were noted: 

  A ‘last minute risk assessment’ by the NDT inspector did not reveal the actual risks owing to his lack of experience, and 

he did not notice that in case of crane slewing the scaffolding would rotate independently from his work spot; 

  There was inadequate initial instruction, and information was not communicated properly to all the involved parties; 

  The  toolbox  talk  process  was  not  conducted  in  accordance  with  established  procedures    the  work  process  was 

discussed without involvement of all parties (deck crew/crane operator); 

  The  wrong  crane  operator  was  informed  before  the  operation  took  place    this  was  done  during  an  accidental 

encounter in the accommodation. 

 
5 

Injury: Failure of Subsea HP Water Jetting Gun 

Following publication in  IMCA safety flash 05/11, whch reported an incident where an  injury sustained by a diver  after the 
subsea failure of a high pressure (HP) water jetting gun, a member would like to draw attention to a similar earlier incident. 
Whilst using an HP water jetting gun underwater, the rear barrel of the gun became unscrewed and fell causing minor injury 
to the diver’s left arm. There was no injury or damage caused by the HP water jet.  Upon closer inspection, it was noticed 
that the threads on the barrel were worn.  

Our member noted the following:  

  The rear barrel of the gun is a protective cover  designed to be screwed onto the gun, to protect the diver from the 

(equalising) HP water jet at the rear during work; 

 

It is possible that due to constant handling, the barrel may have become loose at the screw end; 

  Failure of pre-use inspection to check the tightness of the barrel may also have contributed to the barrel falling off. 

Subsequently, modifications  were made to this and all similar HP water jetting guns, in order to prevent recurrence of the 
incident.  

   

Modifications made to HP water jetting gun 

 

 

6 

Incorrect Information in User Manual for Fixed Fire-Fighting System 

A member has reported that incorrect information was discovered in a user  manual for a Pyrosense SP1 Pyrogen Fixed 
Fire-Fighting  System.  A  review  of  this  manual  revealed  misleading  information,  with  paragraphs  4  and  5  on  page  6  of  49 
contradicting one another.  

The manual reviewed was PyroSense SP-1 Fire detection and fire suppression system: installation and user manual.  

Paragraph 4 states that ‘a pulsating sound will confirm that manual discharge signal is activated. After 5 seconds the sound will stop 
pulsating and a uniform sound will be heard. At this point the MAG generator will be discharged into the protected enclosure’. 

Paragraph 5, meanwhile, says that ‘in the event of a fire the visual and acoustic alarms will be conscious [sic: this is thought to be a 
misprint of ‘constant’], and turn to pulsating when the Pyrogen MAG generator is discharged’. 

The audible alarm referred to in the user manual only sounds in the space where the release has been/will be triggered, and 
is not apparent outside.  Should Pyrogen be released, there is no alarm (either audio or visual) outside the space other than a 
LED on the release panel. 

The  UK  agent  for  the  manufacturer  has  confirmed  that  the  audible  alarm  is  continuous  changing  to  intermittent,  thus 
paragraph 4 is incorrect.  

Because the alarm is not audible outside of the space, our member has fitted the following appropriate visual warning lights: 

  Amber indicates that the system is armed, and no entry is permitted until the system has been isolated by turning and 

  Red indicates that Pyrogen has been released, and no entry should be made until the space has been ventilated and fire 

removing the key;  

extinguished. 

An older version of the manual can be found at www.pyrogen.com/SP1_MAN.pdf. 

 

 

 

