AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 28/16 

Safety Flash 

 October 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Hand Injuries 

(PPE); 

operations; 

closing valve; 

operations; 

This 28th IMCA safety flash of 2016 brings together a number of finger, hand or arm injuries: 

  The first incident covers a cut to the hand which was mitigated by the use of personal protective equipment 

  The  second  is  an  incident  in  which  a  crewman  suffered  a  serious  crush  injury  to  a  finger  during  lifting 

  The  third  is  an  incident  in  which  an  engineer  had  to  be  medevacked  after  losing  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  a 

  The fourth is an incident in which a crewman got his fingers crushed by getting them caught during mooring 

  The fifth is an injury to a worker whose arm was drawn into a machine during commissioning. 

  The  final  incident  relates  to  the  importance  of  continued  good  and  safe  working  practices  when  using 

portable hand grinders. 

Members  are  encouraged  to  revisit  hand  and  finger  safety  and  reiterate  the  importance  of  fundamental  safe 
practice – not taking short cuts, communicating properly, ensuring that the risks in any job are properly assessed, 
understood and dealt with, and doing the job safely with the appropriate PPE.  

1  Crewman Suffers Cut to Hand – But Gloves Prevented It Being Much Worse 

A member has reported an incident in which someone suffered a cut to the hand whilst steadying himself.  The 
incident occurred during a dropped object sweep on the Tether Management System (TMS) in the ROV hangar.  
The system was split so the TMS was approximately 30 cm off the deck.  A crewman stepped down from the TMS 
but slipped off the outer rim of the TMS.  He put his left hand out to control his fall which came in contact with 
the  sharp edge of a cut  ‘Jubilee’ Clip.   His glove was sliced through and his left  palm  had a wound of 2-3cm in 
length. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  The Jubilee Clip was immediately removed and the system was checked for any other similar clips in the same 

  All ends of the Jubilee Clips were secured – all other ROV and Trenching systems were checked for cut Jubilee 

The following actions were taken: 

cut condition; 

Clips which were appropriately dealt with. 

Our member noted the following: 

  His gloves prevented the cut from being deeper and wider, which would probably have lacerated his tendons 

with possible surgery and rehabilitation, leading to months off work and lost income; 

  While every effort needs to be made to increase awareness and mitigate risks of this nature, we can never 

guarantee a hazard-free work environment; 

  This incident is a perfect illustration of why the use of PPE – in this case, appropriate gloves – for the task is 
mandatory.    The  correct  gloves  for  the  task  will  prevent  or  greatly  reduce  the  severity  of  a  hand  injury  at 
work. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search word: cut hand): 

IMCA SF 07/12 – Incident 3 – Two recent cases of hand and arm injuries; 

IMCA SF 05/15 – Incident 4 – Routine task: badly cut finger changing mop head; 

IMCA SF 09/15 – Incident 2 – “Routine” activities – non-routine result: finger injury during welding. 

Members should be aware that IMCA has a pocket card covering hand safety – IMCA SPC 08 – Watch your hands. 

  

 

 
2 

Line of Fire LTI: Finger Injury During Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman suffered a serious injury to his left ring finger, resulting in 
lost work days.  The incident occurred when a H-link (rope-rope type) was being relocated from a storage location 
onto  an  installation  sled.    The  H-link  was  lowered  horizontally  onto  the  sled  with  the  main  crane.    The  H-link 
started swinging as it was being landed, and the injured person, who was a flagman during the operation, tried to 
get it stabilized and into place.  As he was trying to stabilize the H-link, his hand got close to the shackle body and 
due to movement in the shackle, his left ring finger got jammed, leading to a crush injury. 

After  initial  checks  and  first  aid  treatment  from  the  on-board  medic,  the  injured  person  was  transferred  to  a 
hospital ashore for further treatment. 

Lowering of H-link into the sled 

H-link started swinging when being lowered into sled 

 

 

 

 

Showing gap between shackle body and H-link 

Showing pinch point 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  Technical findings: the design of the H-link sled gave the deck crew little tolerance to handle the load.  The 

design of the H-link and shackle body was such that it allowed a wide enough gap to get a hand inside; 

  Management and supervision: roles and responsibilities on deck were unclear.  The injured person, who was 

a dedicated flagman and should have been supervising the operation, stepped in to stabilize the load; 

  Safety controls and systems: the risk assessment used was neither suitable nor sufficient for the task – it had 
been used a month before, but this earlier risk assessment did not capture the change in method, i.e. using 
the main crane instead of the rail crane, and it did not highlight the risk of pinch points; 

  Methods  and  procedures:  there  was  no Management  of  Change  (MoC)  process  for  the  deviation  from  the 
original  task  plan.    This  would  have  included  an  updated  risk  assessment,  which  might  have  captured  the 
associated risks; 

  Attitude and behaviour: insufficient safety awareness  from the injured person with regard to the potential 

risks he faced – he paid no attention to where he put his hand when he was trying to stabilize the load; 

 
  PPE: the deck crew handling the load – all except for the injured person – were wearing impact resistant work 
gloves.    There were no gloves of suitable  size available for the injured person, so he was wearing standard 
gloves.  It is not clear whether or not these gloves would have completely eliminated the injury, when such 
forces have been applied.  However, it might have mitigated the injury; 

  The underlying causes for the incident were: 

  The injured person stepped in to help with stabilizing the load, when he was assigned as flagman for the 

task and should have been supervising the lift 

  The injured person did not pay attention where he put his hand 
  The H-link was lifted with the main crane rather than the rail crane.  There had been no MoC in place for 

this change 

  Pinch points were not identified before the start of the operation 
  Design of the H-link sled – tight tolerances; 
  Neither procedures, nor task plans, described the hazard of these pinch points; 

  The root causes for the incident were: 

  Lack of safety awareness and understanding of roles and responsibilities on deck 
 

Inadequate  planning  of  operation,  insufficient  design,  risk  assessment  and  compliance  (with  MoC 
process). 

The following lessons were learnt: 

  Clearer  understanding  of  roles  and  responsibilities  on  deck  would  have  ensured  that  the  flagman  only 

supervised the operation and did not handle the load; 

  Regular inspection of project equipment on deck would have increased crew familiarity with it and identified 

pinch points and other potential hazards; 

  A more robust MoC process and a suitable and sufficient risk assessment might have prevented this incident. 

The following immediate actions were taken once the injured person had been dealt with appropriately: 

 

Inspection of deck area and H-links to identify other hazardous areas and potential pinch points; 

  H-link marked with red paint to highlight potential pinch point areas; 

  Method for lifting and landing of the H-link was reviewed; 

  Updated task plan/made MoC for the operation, and developed a more detailed risk assessment; 

  PPE – evaluate supplying impact resistant work gloves for all deck crew; 

  Evaluate and assess design of H-link and H-link sled. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: finger, injury): 

 

 

IMCA SF 04/12 – Incident 1 – Lacerated finger during rigging operations; 

IMCA SF 19/16 – Incident 2 – Lost Time Injury (LTI) – loss of end of thumb. 

Members may wish to refer to IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

IMCA publishes a wide range of safety promotional material which is applicable in this instance, including videos, 
pocket cards and safety posters. 

3 

Serious Finger Injury During Valve Installation 

A member has reported an incident in which a second engineer suffered a serious injury leading to the loss of the 
tip of his left middle finger.  The incident occurred during valve operation function tests on a remotely operated 

 
pneumatic controlled valve for a vessel fuel system.  There were some issues with the opening and closing of one 
particular valve. The decision was taken to change out the valve. 

A  second  engineer  and  the  motorman  wanted  to  test  the  new 
valve before it was mounted.  The actuator and valve were on the 
engine  room  deck,  and  the  air  supply  to  the  system  was 
disconnected, but cables for remote control of the actuator were 
connected.  

The  second  engineer  used  an  air-gun  to  supply  low  pressure 
compressed air to the valve, instead of reconnecting the valve to 
the  system  air  controlling  pneumatic  valves.    During  this  pre 
mounting test, the valve did not open properly and got stuck in a half-open position.  The engineer tried to move 
the valve-flap with his fingers.  At the same time, he supplied air to the actuator with the air-gun.  The valve-flap 
suddenly closed, and the tip of his left middle finger was cut off by the valve-flap.  The engineer was medevacked. 

  The immediate cause of the incident was the engineer using his fingers directly on the valve-flap instead of 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

using the correct tools; 

  The job was considered routine by the engine crew; 

  The valve was not secured whilst the engineer tested it; 

  There was no rush when it came to replacing the valve; the crew could have used sufficient time to plan the 

operation in more detail and agree upon which equipment should be used;  

  The engineer carried out simultaneous tasks – he was holding the air-gun with one hand, the valve with the 

left hand and simultaneously tried to move the valve-flap with his fingers, taking a shortcut;  

  Our member considered that some of the root causes of the incident were: 

 

 

inadequate or substandard planning 

the use of short-cuts; 

  Some of the causal factors were as follows: 

  Poor  or  inadequate  risk  assessment:  the  engineer  should  have  been  aware  that  the  valve-flap  could 

suddenly close, and have prepared for it 

  “Routine”  –  complacency  and  low  awareness of  risk:  since  the  replacement  of  valves  was  considered  a 
routine job and carried out regularly, it is possible that the engineer and motorman were not as alert as 
they ought to have been during this specific operation, nor did they have sufficient awareness of risk, and 
they did not properly assess the danger when it came to moving parts 

  PPE:  gloves  were  not  used  by  the  engineer  during  the  replacement of  the  valve.    Company  procedures 
require  that  gloves  in  the  engine  room  should  be  “readily  available  and  worn  as  required  in  work 
permit/risk assessment” 

  Failure to follow procedures: company procedures for Permit to Work state that work on the fuel system 
should been covered by a work permit.  In order to replace the valve, the fuel system/pipe  should have 
been isolated in order to avoid any risk of fuel entering the affected area, and the air system controlling 
pneumatic valves should have been isolated/disconnected.  These would have been covered by the work 
permit and resulted in use of the Lock Out Tag Out procedure/checklist.  The engine crew assessed the 
job to be a low risk routine job and took the view that a Permit to Work was not required. 

Following the “safety stand down” and discussion, our member took the following actions: 

  Further  review  of  company’s  Permit  to  Work  procedures,  Lock  Out  Tag  Out  System  procedures,  and  Risk 

Assessment procedures; 

  A renewed focus to be on finger/hand injuries; 

 
  Further review of risk assessment for work on fuel system and changing of pneumatic valves. 

IMCA  publishes  a  range  of  safety  promotional  material  which  will  be  useful  to  members  in  addressing  this 
incident.  In particular, members’ attention is drawn to the pocket card “watch your hands” found here. 

 

 

 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (search words: finger, hand): 

IMCA SF 02/11 – Incident 2 – Serious hand injury during use of deck scaler: 
  A root cause: “Failure to follow basic safe working practices”; 

IMCA SF 11/12 – Incident 1 – LTI: hand injury: 
  A root cause: “Risk was considered to be tolerable – the work party considered the work to be safe.  There 

was inadequate understanding of the risks involved.”; 

IMCA SF 08/16 – Incident 2 – LTI: finger injury whilst working in engine room: 
  A  root  cause:  “lack  of  hazard  awareness/complacency  –  the  injured  person  did  not  identify  using  the 
machine  as  a  hazard  and  did  not  use  the  available  safety  guards  and  processes  whilst  operating  [the 
machine]”. 

4  Unsafe Method of Rope Work Resulted in Severe Hand Injury 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  safety  alert  number  16-22  regarding  an  incident  in  which  a 
crewman suffered serious injuries to three of his fingers during mooring operations.  The incident occurred when 
the crew of the vessel were preparing mooring lines for arrival in port.  An Able Seaman was spooling a mooring 
line from the starboard locker to the starboard tugger winch aft.  During this operation, a crow bar slipped and 
the seaman was forced against the guide roller.  He caught his fingers between the crow bar and roller, leading to 
injuries to three of his fingers, including loss of one joint of a finger. 

The MSF safety alert records the following: 

 

Immediate cause: an unsafe method for spooling line onto the tugger winch; 

  Basic causal factors included: 

held 

 

the seaman performing the work was new on board the vessel. 

  poor planning: there was no  risk  assessment conducted before the job, nor was a toolbox  talk meeting 

 

 
The full report can be found here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: unsafe, mooring): 

 

 IMCA SF 04/09 Incident 3 Mooring incidents: 
  “Members’  attention  is  drawn  to  the  attached  document  from  the  UK  P&I  Club  which  is  of  interest 

regarding potential accidents that can arise from mooring operations”. 

Members  may  wish  to  refer  to  IMCA  SEL  029  –  Mooring  practice  safety  guidance  for  offshore  vessels  when 
alongside in ports and harbours. 

5  Manufacturing Firm Fined After Worker’s Arm Injured in Roller 

The  UK  Health  &  Safety  Executive  (UKHSE)  has  prosecuted  a  company  responsible  for  an  incident  in  which  a 
worker’s arm was injured in machinery.  The incident occurred when an installation engineer was commissioning 
a new conveyor belt system.  The engineer suffered a broken arm when it was pulled into the machinery. 

The investigation by the UK HSE found that there was a lack of effective guarding and isolation procedures on 
the machinery. 

The company was fined £170,000.  

See here for details. Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: guard): 

 

IMCA SF 11/12 – Incident 1 – LTI: hand injury. 

6  Portable Grinders – Hand Safety 

A member has reported on a review of abrasive wheels on board a chartered vessel as a part of abrasive wheel 
training  delivery,  in  which there  were  a  number of  significant  faults  found with  portable  hand  grinders.   These 
required urgent and immediate attention. 

The three issues illustrated below cover the appropriate and proper safe use of power tools: 

 
9” Grinder with heavily worn disc 

attached 

Our member noted the following: 

Worn disc and as new disc 

9” Grinder with 5” disc fitted 

 

 

 

  Grinders and grinding discs should never be used in this manner; 

  Grinding  discs  should  be  inspected  before  use  to  ensure  that  they  are  in  acceptable  condition  and  are  the 

correct size, type and rating for the grinder; 

 
  There  have  been many  fatalities  caused  by  incorrect  discs  being  used  –  many due  to the  disc  shattering at 

speed; 

 

If you aren’t sure, ask!! 

  Only trained and competent personnel should use abrasive wheels; 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: grinder, grinding): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 06/01 – Incident 3 – Use of hand-held disc grinders; 

IMCA SF 06/05 – Incident 1 – Hand grinder injuries; 

IMCA SF 05/11 – Incident 2 – Improper use of tools: bruising; 

IMCA SF 11/11 – Incident 3 – Grinding disc with defects. 

Whilst no cause for complacency, it is instructive to note that incidents involving inappropriate use of hand-held 
grinders  tend  to  be  further  in  the  past,  possibly  indicating  that  lessons  have  been  learnt  in  recent  times.  
Returning to those lessons is nevertheless an entirely appropriate use of time and resources. 

