Safety Flash 

July 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 18/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

Some  of  the  incidents  here  are  related  only  to  the  extent  to  which  rigging,  lifting  and  mooring  equipment  is 
involved, or has failed, or has been inappropriately used.  The first incident is a capsize of a small boat, wherein a 
root cause was found to be the prioritisation of production over safety.  In the second, also a high potential near 
miss, we read of damage to a small boat when the painter failed during recovery.  Next, two incidents relating to 
subsea lifting. In the first, there was an unplanned and uncontrolled ascent of lift bags to the surface.  In the second, 
a strand of a subsea lifting wire was found damaged.  The fifth incident covers the parting of a mooring line and 
then  a  fuel  line  during  at-sea  bunkering  operations,  and  the  sixth  incident  describes  inappropriate  and  unsafe 
techniques to control hydraulic levers during mooring operations.  

1  High Potential Incident: Fast Rescue Craft Capsized 

What happened 

A  fast  rescue  craft  (FRC)  being  used  in  a  near-shore  shallow 
water  seismic  survey  in  tropical  waters,  capsized  causing  four 
people to fall into the sea.  There were no injuries, but most of 
the  work  equipment  was  either  damaged  or  lost.    Two of  the 
personnel were not wearing lifejackets. 

What went wrong/causes 

The operation had been taking place in good weather; however, 
minutes  before 
the  weather  conditions 
deteriorated  rapidly  with  the  wind  quickly  changing  direction.  
The  coxswain  recommended  running  for  shelter,  but  was 
overruled by offshore vessel management. 

incident 

the 

Towed  equipment  became  snagged  on  the  seabed  causing  it  to  act  as  an  anchor,  turning  the  small  boat  stern 
towards the weather.  The crew were not able to free the equipment, and the small boat, which was operating at 
its maximum load capacity, took on water over the stern and capsized. 

What lessons were learnt? 

  Never  allow  production  pressures  to  take  precedence  over  the  safety  of  personnel.    In  this  instance  the 

coxswain effectively called a ‘Stop the Job’ and was overruled; 

 

 

 
  Small boats should be capable of operating safely in all expected weather conditions.  In this case, the FRC being 
used for operations was loaded to capacity and had limited deck space for efficient deployment/recovery of 
equipment; 

  Always ensure that procedures are in place for foreseeable emergency situations.  This scenario (equipment 
snagging)  had  not  been  adequately  risk  assessed  and  mitigations  were  not  in  place.    Had  a  system  been 
implemented  to  allow  the  in-water  equipment  to  be  released  from  the  vessel  then  it  is  unlikely  that  the 
situation would have resulted in a capsize. 

  Reiterate to all personnel that the company will always support a ‘Stop the Job’, putting safety over production; 

  Review small boat procedures and associated risk assessments to ensure all reasonable emergency situations 

  Ensure  that  small  boats  are  suitable  for  the  task  and  capable  of  working  in  all  expected  environmental 

conditions.  Never operate to the absolute limit of the vessel. 

What were the actions? 

have been considered; 

Further small boat incidents 

IMCA has received a number of further incidents involving small boats recently, which are included here: 

Incident 1 - during small boat (Zodiac) operations, a boat was thrown by a long and heavy swell against the side of 
a boat landing on a single point mooring (SPM).  As a result the Zodiac was damaged; there was an air leak to the 
rear end floatation collar.  No one was harmed.  The boat was safely recovered after operations and was examined 
on deck.  A crack 150mm long was found on the inner face of starboard side rear floatation.  Repairs were made. 

Incident 2 - a small boat (Zodiac) was involved in tanker mooring operations at a single point mooring (SPM), and 
was dealing with attaching floating hoses.  Owing to swell conditions, the rolling and pitching of the Zodiac during 
this operation endangered the safety of the personnel on board.  The small boat was pushed under a floating hose 
and a rigger was hit on his shoulder with a hose chain. 

IMCA reiterates the recommendations outlined by our member above, particularly encouraging members to ensure 
that small boats are suitable for the task and capable of working in all expected environmental conditions. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Fatality after capsize of workboat with eight persons on board (July 2011) 

  High potential near-miss: Damage to small boat during offshore survey operations (June 2016) 

2  Painter Parted during Small Boat Operations 

What happened 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) reports an incident in which the forward painter quick release on a fast rescue craft 
(FRC) parted during recovery of the boat.  Three crew members were in the FRC. 

During recovery of the FRC, the forward painter quick release parted just as the FRC was lifted out of the water.  
The FRC then swung to starboard causing the stern to come into contact with the mother vessel.  The jet guard 
struck the side of the vessel and the jet itself struck the side of the vessel.  The FRC bucket was cracked, as was the 
jet inside the bucket and the jet guard was found slightly bent.  The FRC was recovered with no injuries to the crew-
members. 

 

 
What went wrong/causes 

been in operation for two years; 

  The forward painter quick release mechanism used had no time limit for use nor inspection criteria, and had 

  A  previous  near  miss  had  been  recorded  where  the  clip  had  parted  resulting  in  a  visual  inspection  of  the 

‘outside’ of the quick release where the spring mechanism cannot be viewed. 

 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

The incident happened in calm summer conditions.  The crew were briefed and trained (irrespective of weather 
conditions) to brace themselves and hold on tightly when being lifted; had this not been the case then there was 
potential for injury or fall from the FRC. 

The  springs  inside  the  quick  release  clip  will  deteriorate  with  weather  exposure  and  high  usage  and  cannot  be 
viewed from the outside.  There were no records of inspections within the planned maintenance system.  

The following corrective actions were carried out: 

  The quick release mechanism was replaced immediately with a G-link type, eliminating the spring mechanism; 

  Planned maintenance system – 6 monthly visual inspection implemented; 

  Risk assessment reviewed; 

  All crew reminded to be conscious of dangers at all times – complacency is not an option! 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Failure of rescue boat release mechanism 

3  Near Miss: Failure of Subsea Lifting Equipment 

What happened 

A  dummy  spool  connected  to two  lift  bags made  a  rapid  and  uncontrolled  ascent  to  the  surface.   The  incident 
occurred during diving operations on a construction barge.  There were no immediate consequences but the event 
had potential to cause serious injury to personnel and damage to assets. 

Divers were carrying out a dummy spool removal activity on the seabed at a depth of 110 fsw.  As the last bolt was 
being removed the spool section broke free and rapidly ascended to the surface.  When the bags arrived at the 
surface they lost some of their volume, resulting in partial deflation, and the load fell back to the seabed, away 
from the dive site.  The load was later safely recovered to the deck of the barge. 

 

 

 

What went wrong/causes 

Investigation suggested that the immediate cause was the absence of hold-back lines from the spool section to 
suitable fixed anchoring points. 

The lift bags had been inflated without appropriate ‘hold-back rigging’ in place and that there had been a failure to 
follow company procedures, handover instructions and guidance detailed in IMCA D 016 – Open parachute type 
underwater air lift bags. 

It was also noted that the dive plan had listed ‘install lift bags complete with hold-back rigging to the DMA’ as a 
specific activity requiring supervisor verification and sign-off on step completion. 

The risk had also been identified in the risk analysis and appropriate mitigations defined.  In addition, dedicated 
dead man anchors (DMAs) had been deployed to the seabed for use as anchoring points. 

Lessons learnt 

Post incident debriefs and ‘times out for safety’ were held with the dive teams, including details of the incident, 
review of video footage and sharing key lessons learnt, identifying the following lessons: 

  Ensure the dive plan is read, understood and followed; 

  Ensure mitigations identified in risk assessments are applied stringently; 

  Ensure the diving task is conducted following company working procedures; 

  Ensure the diving task and company procedures follow IMCA recommendations on any diving operation; 

  Ensure dive supervisors fully understand their ownership and accountability for the activities with which they 

are tasked. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Uncontrolled ascent of spool and diver during a lifting bag operation 

  Uncontrolled ascent of lift bag 

 
4  Near Miss: Single Wire Strand Protruded from Original Lay 

What happened 

During deployment of the bell and clump weight from a vessel for subsea inspection of a riser line, it was observed 
that a single wire strand protruded from original lay (‘high stranding’).  The bell was recovered, the clump weight 
wire visually inspected and  it was  determined  that a 60m cut back of damaged rope take place.  The  damaged 
section was removed and the rope re-terminated. 

Third party mandatory load test and certification of the item was carried out and certified as fit for purpose and 
diving operations resumed. 

 

What lessons were learnt? 

recommended for diving operations; 

  The  clump  weight  should  not  remain  subsea  during  periods  of  increased  tidal  current  above  the  limit 

  There should be thorough visual inspection of all the ropes and sockets during recovery and deployment of 

  Ensure frequent monitoring for the ropes and sockets, and any findings recorded; 

  Any  small  defects,  damage  or  abnormality  on  ropes  should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Competent 

clump weight; 

Person;  

  Precautions should be in place to avoid stress on ropes caused by adverse weather conditions. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Near miss: Fault spotted in subsea lifting wire 

 

 
5  Parting of Hawser and Bulk Cargo Hose during Tandem Mooring 

What happened 

During at-sea bunkering operations between two vessels, a mooring line parted and then a fuel hose parted also.  
There was no spillage of fuel.  The incident occurred when one vessel (Vessel A) arrived to deliver fuel to another 
vessel (Vessel B), which was at anchor with thrusters running. 

It was decided to moor both vessels in tandem.  Vessel B would maintain heading and control yaw using thrusters.  
Both vessels were moored to each other using one rope in a criss-cross fashion. 

Vessel  B  could  not  start  its  fuel  pump  and  thus  the  fuel  transfer  could  not  be  started.  The  two  vessels  stayed 
connected in tandem. 

The mooring rope from Vessel A parted due to jerking and continuous yawing.  Crew on Vessel B were told to close 
the deck fuel valve and disconnect the hose for retrieval.  The hose was disconnected and crew on Vessel A started 
retrieval using the port tugger winch.  While they were retrieving the hose, it got entangled with the remaining 
single mooring rope and the vessel structure, and the hose parted on deck.  No spillage was noticed as hose was 
empty. 

The parted mooring rope and bulk cargo hose were retrieved by Vessel A. 

What went wrong/causes 

  There were 1.5m seas and wind of approx. 14 knots. Both vessels were yawing – the mooring ropes was getting 
intermittent jerks which resulted in  one of them parting.    The uncontrolled heaving of the bulk cargo hose 
resulted in it parting; 

  Both vessels could  have  decided  to  call  off  or  postpone  the  operation  until the  fuel  pump  was  operational 

and/or weather would improve. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Near miss: Hose parted 

 

During a routine marine inspection of a vessel it was observed that rope lines had been attached to the mooring 
winch control levers to facilitate ‘remote’ operation of the winches. 

 
6  Unsafe Mooring Practices 

What happened 

This is an inappropriate and unsafe practice.  There are a 
number of very good reasons why, including: 

  Accidentally pulling on the wrong line and performing 

an unintended action; 

  Crew  member  getting  entangled  in  the  lines  and 

inadvertently operating the winch; 

 

Lack of proper control of winches. 

Mooring and unmooring a vessel is inherently a potentially 
dangerous  operation  and  requires  crews  to  be  in  full 
control of all associated equipment. 

Recommendations included:  

  handling of equipment and gear 
  communications 
  directing the winchman. 

  Adequate personnel under the supervision of a certified officer should be available for: 

Members are recommended to the following IMCA publications: 

IMCA SEL 029 – Mooring practice safety guidance for offshore vessels when alongside in ports and harbours 

IMCA SEL 038 – Mooring incidents (DVD). 

 

 

 

