SAFETY FLASH 

 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 26/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

LTI – Rigger Tripped Over Quayside Obstacle in the Dark and Fell  

What happened? 

A rigger walking along the quayside tripped over an obstacle, and in the resulting fall suffered fractures to both 
wrists, a bone in his hand and his elbow.  The incident occurred at night during a project mobilisation.  The rigger 
walked down the gangway and onto the quayside to help the deck foreman.  He tripped over a grillage I-beam 
fabricated to the turning bollard that was awaiting lift onto the vessel. 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The rigger did not take sufficient care or recognise the hazards and risks associated with walking through an 

area where equipment had been stored for loading;  

  Other personnel involved in quayside operations and handling of equipment did not intervene or fully recognise 

all hazards and risks associated with activities and equipment; 

 

Identified control measures for slips, trips and falls were not applied to quayside operations; 

  The  QA/QC checks  performed were  not  fully  effective  as  they  focused  on  dimensional  and  integrity  checks 

rather than occupational safety hazards; 

  The grillage ‘I’ beam was not identified as a potential tripping hazard during inspection or handling activities; 

  The grillage ‘I’ beam was in shadow and there had been no consideration of additional onsite lighting; 

  Responsibility for management and control of quayside operations was not clearly defined. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Ensure  that  shift  handovers  clearly  identify  who  has  responsibility  for  operations  on  the  Quayside.    Before 
starting work, at the start of each shift the Quayside should be checked by those responsible for hazards and 
to ensure it provides a safe place of work; 

  Consider provision of further portable lighting as required during mobilisation; 

  Ensure  principles  of  dynamic  risk  assessment  are  applied  to  day-to-day  routine  operations;  this  provides 
opportunity to continually assess the surrounding environment for hazards and adapt to change throughout 
the shift. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

 

LTI: Feet trapped in motion compensated telescopic gangway [one of the identified causes: insufficient lighting 
on the gangway resulted in a lack of awareness of the location and movement of the sliding step]; 

  Guidance on safety in shipyards (IMCA SEL 032). 

2  Glow Sticks Breaking Open – Chemical Splash Risk 

What happened? 

While activating a ‘glow stick’ the casing snapped releasing the glow 
dye.  Our member noted that a number of sticks from the same batch 
broke open, releasing the chemical dye contents.   

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Probable causes noted: 

  Storage – the plastic from which these are made is known to be 
brittle  if  exposed  to  extreme  temperatures.    This  may  be  a 
probable cause considering warehousing locations of the item; 

 

Issues  with  manufacture  –  the  manufacturer  speculated  that 
“during the injection when we make the tube a small piece of dust 
[may have] prevented the tube from forming properly which can 
cause this type of phenomenon.” 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned?  

  Ensure long-term storage in appropriate air-conditioned environment; 

  When opening such light sticks, do so well away from your eyes, and wearing protective gloves; 

  Check expiry date and/or authenticity of existing stock of such materials. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

 

 

Life  Raft  self-activates  and  falls  to  the  quayside  [causal  factor:  exposure  of  equipment  to  very  high 
temperatures]. 

3  High Potential Dropped Object During Lifting Operations 

What happened? 

A crewman was hit by a steel plate bouncing off the deck after it 
fell 14m from a load after a magnet failed.  The incident occurred 
when shaped steel plates for reinforcing were being lifted from the 
main  deck  to  the  ROV  hangar  through  a  hatch.    The  lifting 
equipment was a 25T crane, two connected soft slings and a heavy-
duty  magnet.    As  a  lift  was  swung  into  position  over  the  hatch 
opening,  one  steel  plate  (sized  roughly  1.5m  x  1m  and  weighing 
approx. 450 kg) came loose from the magnet and fell approximately 
14 meters down into the ROV hangar.  

A welder foreman who was in the area underneath, was struck by 
the plate in the back of his legs as the plate bounced up from deck.  
Investigation  after  the  incident  showed  the  plate  had  bounced 
twice and the last time it struck the bulkhead forward in the ROV 
hangar.  The welder was able to walk away from the incident but 
complained subsequently of pains where the plate had struck.  He 
was sent to hospital for a check-up and returned to work the next 
day. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The  plate  was  so  shaped  that  the  magnet  could  not  hold  it 
properly: it was noted that 8 or 9 rectangular plates without cut 
outs had been lifted successfully with the magnet.   The plate 
that fell was shaped differently, having a rectangle 68 cm x 54 
cm cut from it (see photographs).  As this plate was to be lifted, no one took into consideration that this plate 
had a large cut out, limiting the connection area for the magnet; 

  Clear instructions were not followed: investigation also shows that the lifting operation was planned with clear 
instructions NOT to use magnet for lifting into ROV hangar.  Pallets were to be used to lift plates into hangar, 
and magnet to distribute only, not above 300mm off deck. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

 

Lifting plans should be followed and should also cover all aspects, as in this case, where there are differences 
in object properties.  This short cut could easily have resulted in major injury and, more than likely, a fatality if 
the plate had struck directly; 

  The importance of following plans and also focus on identifying increased risk cannot be stressed enough. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

LTI as a result of load dropped from lifting magnet; 

  Guidelines for lifting operations (IMCA SEL 019). 
 

 

4  High Potential Near Miss: Tensioner Pad Dropped to Under Deck Carousel  

What happened? 

During  the  trans-spooling  of  an  umbilical,  a  tensioner  pad  retaining  bolt 
sheared, resulting in a 1.5kg tensioner pad dislodging and falling 11m to the 
under-deck carousel, where it struck the already trans-spooled umbilical.  The 
dropped pad then bounced towards the starboard side, narrowly missing the 
deck supervisor, and landed on a salt sack approximately 1 metre from him. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  A decision had been taken not to change the grade 8.8 bolts with the 10.9 

bolts, due to resources, timescale and difficulty of access; 

  The retaining bolt was not subject to an inspection, nor were the torque 

values checked due to the difficulty in accessing the tensioner; 

  Risk  assessments  had  not  been  conducted  prior  to  the  work  activity, 
therefore there had been no consideration of potential dropped objects or 
mitigation thereof. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Replace M10 x  25mm grade  8.8 retaining bolts with M10 x 25mm grade 

10.9 on all equipment prior to mobilisation to vessels; 

  Corrective  work  orders  to  be  fully  completed  inclusive  of  inspection  of 
tensioner pad retaining bolts and torque value checks, prior to mobilising 
equipment to vessels; 

  Risk assessment of this type of work should take place before it starts.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

  High Potential Dropped Object; 

  Serious Dropped Object Incidents; 

  Dropped Object: lay tower adjuster leg pin; 

  Avoiding Dropped Objects (pocket card) 

  Saipem Drops – Choice not Chance (video); 

  Technip Drops (video). 

