SAFETY FLASH 

 April 2019 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/19 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Fishing Nets Caught in Propellers 

What happened? 

While preparing to resume survey operations close inshore during the hours of darkness, a vessel caught unmarked 
fishing nets in both main propellers.  The incident occurred a little over one nautical mile from shore, after around 
three days of waiting on weather. 

The propulsion system was stopped before completing a visual inspection at the stern of the vessel.  Fishing nets 
were observed on the port side, leading beneath the vessel.  It was confirmed that the fishing nets were entangled 
in both propellers, disabling both and leading to limited vessel manoeuvrability.  The bow thruster was used to 
maintain control of the vessel and slow down to drift towards the shore.  In due course, the vessel was able to 
anchor in a safe location away from seabed assets and await assistance.  

Port Propeller (As Found) 

Starboard Propeller (As Found) 

 

 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Suspension  of  operations  until  such  a  time  that  a  review  and  improvement  of  the  project  risk  assessment 
document  was  completed  to  fully  capture  the  scenario  where  multiple  propellers  and/or  thrusters  are 
compromised/immobilised due to entanglement with fishing nets or other floating debris;  

  A proper look-out should be maintained by sight and hearing as well as by all available means appropriate in 
the prevailing circumstances and conditions, so as to make a full appraisal of the situation and reduce the risk 
of encountering in/on water debris/fishing activities.  If hazards are observed and considered by the Officer of 
the Watch (OoW) to pose a significant risk to the vessel, consider suspending operations. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Costly damage to azimuth thruster caused by fishing gear 

2  Oil Spill During Bunkering 

What happened? 

During bunkering operations alongside, there was a spillage of around 3 litres of fuel when the hose coupling was 
loosened during fault-finding.  The incident occurred when a vessel took bunkers supplied by five tanker trucks, one 
after the other.  The bunker hose was connected to the manifold from the first truck.  Bunkering was started and 
after about four minutes, the truck driver complained of back pressure and bunkering was stopped. 

To investigate the reason for the back pressure, suspecting that the manifold valve was not functioning properly, 
the Chief Engineer instructed the Fitter to open the hose coupling at the manifold.  As soon as the coupling was 
loosened, fuel oil sprayed out onto the pier due to pressure in the pipe.  Disconnection was stopped immediately, 
and the spilt oil was contained in the save-all at the manifold. 

The local Coast Guard were informed and arrived at the site for an investigation.  They instructed crew to clean up 
the spilt oil on the pier and retain the sweepings onboard.  Clean-up on deck and pier was done using the vessel’s 
SOPEP equipment.  Reports were made to all concerned parties as required.  No restrictions were placed on the 
vessel by the Coast Guard or the port. 

Bunker hose connection at ship’s bunker manifold 

Ship’s bunker manifold valve 

 

 

What were the causes? 

  The immediate cause was carelessness; without giving the problem much thought the Chief Engineer decided 

to open the hose coupling without checking if the bunker line was drained properly; 

  Causal factors were inadequate planning and inadequate maintenance/supervision; 

  The root causes identified were: 

− 

− 

the Chief Engineer was not able to methodically diagnose the reason for the back pressure and did not 
consider the risks involved in opening the hose coupling without checking that the line was not pressurised 

there was no check of residual oil in the line by opening the drain dock 

−  no instruction was given to the truck driver to open the truck valve to allow the oil to drain back into the 

truck. 

What action was taken?  

A full review of bunkering procedures took place.   

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Oil Spill Incident 

  Fuel Spill During In-Port Bunkering 

3  Damaged High Pressure Content Gauge Hoses on Bail-Outs 

What happened? 

During diving activities on two occasions in the same 24-hour period, a diver noticed that there was no pressure 
left in his bail-out bottle.  The decision was taken by the Dive Supervisor to recover the diver from the water, as per 
standard protocol.  After recovery, the bail-out bottle and appliances were checked, and it was found that the high 
pressure content gauge hose on the bail-out was damaged. 

Both hoses were replaced for new hoses. 

Damaged hose showed cuts in outer skin 

Damaged hose showed a damaged outer skin near the 

 

 

ferrule 

What went wrong? 

The short interval in which these two incidents happened triggered an investigation which revealed the following:  

  There were two different types of damage: 

−  cuts; most likely caused by sharp mussels and stones (illustration above left) 
−  damage caused by bending and overstressing (illustration above right); 

  Both hoses were leak tested and found to be leaking through holes near the ferrule connector; 

  Both hoses were fitted with bend restrictors; 

  The  hoses  were  maintained  and  tested  in  accordance  with  Code  of  practice  for  the  initial  and  periodic 

examination, testing and certification of diving plant and equipment (IMCA D 018); 

  The hoses were subjected to a regular visual inspection before every dive; 

  Both hoses were in use for up to 4 years and were regularly used. 

What were the causes? 

Investigation suggested that one type of HP hose is prone to damage near the ferule connector, caused by bending 
and stressing, regardless of the use of a bend restrictor present at this location.  The damage was not sustained in 
one single occasion but is believed to have developed over time. 

What actions were taken? 

There are different types of HP hoses on the market with specific characteristics: 

  Hose type 1: fatigue like damage may occur near the ferrule over time.  When this damage occurs, it can lead 
to  loss  of  the  bail-out  within  a  dive.    In  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  this  type  of  damage  occurring,  annual 
replacement may be required, depending on usage. 

  Hose type 2: does not show the same fatigue damage development as the construction is more flexible and 

rugged. 

 

Picture 

Hose Type 1 

Hose Type 2 

Appearance 

Thin, smooth, black, shiny 

Thick, black, dull-coloured  

Dimensions 

Outside diameter 10.8mm 

Outside diameter 12.5mm 

Composition 

3 layers: 

3 layers: 

 

 

  Thin layer, plastic-like type (shrink fit) 

  Thick outer layer, rubber compound 

  Soft woven middle layer 

  Soft woven middle layer 

  Rigid inner layer, hard plastic-like tube 

  Flexible 

thick 

inner 

layer, 

rubber 

compound 

Layers can move freely from each other 
Outer layer easily cut with knife 
Stiff,  hard  to  bend,  inner  layer  tends  to 
buckle 

Layers are vulcanized to each other 
In general, hard to cut with a knife 
Easier  to  bend,  smaller  bending  radius, 
inner layer does not tend to buckle 

Other findings 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Bail-Out Whip Failures 

4 

Fire: Smoke Coming from an Expired Line Throwing Cartridge Kept for Disposal 

What happened? 

A fire alarm went off; the location of the fire was confirmed, and a team went for 
investigation.    Heavy  smoke  was  observed  coming  from  a  spare  cabin.    The 
incident occurred on a vessel working within 500m of a rig.  The rig was informed, 
the  vessel  stopped  work  and  immediately  left  the  500m  safety  zone.    A  fully 
equipped fire team entered the cabin and it was found that the smoke was coming 
from an expired line-throwing apparatus (LTA) cartridge, which was being kept for 
disposal. 

The expired LTA box was removed from the location and kept on the main deck. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The expired  pyrotechnics were  stored  for  an extended  period onboard  the 

vessel. 

 

Inadequate work procedure and poor perception of risk. 

What actions were taken? 

The vessel crew made a prompt response to the situation, rapidly and professionally dealing with what could have 
been a serious fire. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Expired pyrotechnics should be showed in an appropriate, safe and properly marked location; 

  Old pyrotechnics should not be stored on the vessel for long periods. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI) caused by inadvertent activation of expired line throwing device 

  Accidental Activation of expired pyrotechnics (hand flare) 

  Disposal Of Pyrotechnics (MSF) 

5  Hot Water Fitting Failure Results in 3m Loss of Depth in Diving Bell 

What happened? 

Whilst the diving bell was on the surface, pre-dive bell checks were being completed by the Bellman, when it was 
observed by the Dive Supervisor and Bellman that the bell was losing pressure. 

The Dive Supervisor began to blowdown the bell to compensate for the loss of pressure.  The Bellman lowered the 
bell door to isolate the diving bell from the chamber complex.  The Bellman then proceeded to close all emergency 
valves in the bell and the Deck Diver closed all corresponding external bell valves.  The pressure loss was stopped, 
and it was determined that a fitting had failed on the hot water distribution system.  The Bellman made the bell 
safe and returned to the system; the bell was then surfaced for repairs.   

Upon further investigation, it was established that the D2 hot water fitting (see picture below) which connects the 
isolation valve was cracked.  This opened a leak path via the crack to atmosphere. 

The actions taken by the Dive Team clearly demonstrated the effectiveness of conducting training and drills. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The failure of the fitting is believed to have been caused by the impact sustained from a diver’s bail out bottle 

making contact with the unprotected fittings at the manifold; 

  The bell was completely refurbished during a dry docking in 2011; 

  There were no records of the fittings being replaced in the company planned maintenance system (PMS);  

 

  The age of the damaged fittings could not be determined.  It was not known if the fittings were replaced after 

the 2011 dry dock.  

for impact damage; 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Review similar existing fittings to verify if there has been any impact damage and also if there is the potential 

  Ensure  all  critical  components  are  recorded  in  PMSs  and  that  they  also  meet  the  requirements  of  Code  of 
practice for the initial and periodic examination, testing and certification of diving plant and equipment (IMCA 
D 018).  

