AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/14 

Safety Flash 

  September 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Crane   

1  Dropped  Object  Near  Miss  –  Unsecured  Plastic  Box  fell  from  Load  being  Lifted  by  Mobile 

A member has reported an incident in which an unsecured plastic box detached from the load and fell to the bottom of the 
dry dock. The incident occurred when a vessel was on the fourth day of a fast-track dry docking to investigate and repair oil 
leaks (and possible damage) to the vessel azimuth thrusters. Additional maintenance tasks and repairs were being carried out 
at the same time.  

Dockyard personnel were lifting a piston from one of the vessels thrusters to  the top of the dry dock, using their  mobile 
crane.  In  order  to  contain  residual  oil  remaining  on  the  piston,  the  lifting  team  attached  a  plastic  box  to  the  piston.  The 
piston  was  securely  slung.  However,  the  plastic  box  was  insecurely  slung,  using  pallet  wrap.  Wind  speed  was  gusting  to 
approximately 40mph. As the load reached the top of the dry dock (height 11-12m), a gust of wind blew the plastic box off 
the piston, which resulted in the plastic box falling back to the bottom of the dry dock. There was no one working on the 
floor of the dry dock where the box landed. There were no injuries and no damage.  

Figure 1: vessel in dry dock with mobile crane 

Figure 2: plastic box 

 

 

♦  There was insufficient oversight, management and control of dockyard personnel, particularly during lifting operations; 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The job was promptly stopped by the banksman; 

♦ 

Incorrect tools were used for the job. 

A number of further factors were identified: 

♦  The dry docking was unplanned and sudden or ‘fast tracked’;  

♦  There  were  adverse  weather  conditions  which,  in  addition  to  being  a  contributory  factor  to  this  particular  incident, 

nearly prevented the vessel getting in to dry dock which could have delayed the entire project; 

 
♦  Forecasted adverse weather further affected the work schedule that day. Dockyard personnel used an incorrect tool (a 
plastic box)  and  an insecure  method for attaching the box, in order to mitigate possible delays, believing the onset of 
more severe weather – possibly preventing the use of the crane - may have been imminent. 

In this case, the dropped objects prevention scheme (DROPS) calculator provides only an indication of possible outcomes. 
The  box  in  question  had  a  relatively  large  surface  area  which  wind  resistance  would  have  slowed  during  descent. 
Notwithstanding this, it still had the potential to cause serious injury or even a fatality. 

Our  member  noted  that  in  a  ‘normally  planned’  dry  docking,  personnel  visit  dockyards,  well  in  advance  of  the  vessels,  to 
ensure the dockyard is ready to receive the vessel and that systems and procedures, including those related to health and 
safety,  are  in  place  and  in  compliance  with  company  requirements.    However,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  even 
where  a  docking  is  ‘fast-tracked’  or  unplanned  and  at  very  short  notice,  that  all  personnel,  including  dockyard  personnel, 
follow safe working practices and procedures. 

Our member took the following actions: 

♦  Reiterated to all personnel that the vessel must have oversight of all lifts (including risk assessment, methods of work, 
times, locations, projected environmental conditions (wind, fog etc) even if vessel personnel have no direct involvement 
in the lift; 

♦  Ensured that correct tools and lifting methods are always used, even where the vessel has no direct involvement in the 

lift; 

♦ 

♦ 

♦  Reiterated to both crew and dockyard staff, during all dockings, that there is not only a right, but an obligation to ‘stop 

the job’ if they see anything that they think is unsafe. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: dropped, object): 

IMCA SF 08/11 – Incident 2: Recent near miss incidents involving potential dropped objects (Marine Safety Forum); 

IMCA SF 06/13 – Incident 4: Near miss: dropped objects during lifting operations; 

Members may wish to refer to IMCA SEL 032 – Guidance on safety in shipyards. 

2 

440V Electrical Shock Incident  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  which  a  technician  received  a  440V  electric  shock.  The  incident  occurred  during  an 
investigation  of  a  power  distribution  unit  (PDU)  located  in  the  ROV  control  room  onboard  a  vessel.  The  purpose  of  the 
investigation into the PDU unit was to conclude whether the observation ROV being powered from this PDU was able to 
provide  output  data  of  a  certain  quality.  The  person  who  was  shocked  was  not  harmed  and  did  not  require  any  medical 
follow up.   

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The  task  was  not  a  planned  operation  and  it  was  performed  by  personnel  with  inadequate  training/knowledge  of  the 

dangers associated with this work; 

♦  The PDU was not properly labelled with warning signs, and had no top cover; 

♦  There were two separate power supplies to the PDU; this was not identified due to the low level of familiarisation of 

involved personnel; 

♦  The ROV supervisor was not notified about the operation; 

♦  There was no job-specific permit to work (PTW) or any management of change. However, a generic PTW was made; 

♦  There  was  a  risk  assessment  but  it  was  neither  suitable  nor  sufficient  –  not  according  to  requirements  in  regards  to 

details, attendees and quality.   

 Our member noted the causes: 

♦  The direct cause of the incident was that the technician touched or came near equipment that was powered to 440 V; 

♦  The root causes identified were as follows: 

−  Rescheduling of work tasks caused personnel to carry out ad-hoc investigations inside the PDU unit 

−  There was poor safety awareness related to ongoing work 

−  The PDU was inadequately labelled as being a place where there was danger of electrical shock 

 

−  There was no detailed PTW completed 

−  There  was  inadequate  risk  assessment  underpinning  the  work  on  the  PDU  unit.  The  risk  assessment  was  not 

performed to such a level of detail that it allowed actual risks to be disclosed 

−  The persons doing the work were inadequately trained on this particular ROV system 

−  There was inadequate quality and safety verification of equipment received onboard 

− 

It was not clear to personnel how the organization works offshore.  

♦  Always make a detailed risk assessment and be compliant with the control of work system; 

♦  There should be thorough verification and site acceptance of new equipment, particularly with regard to quality, labelling, 

 The following lessons were identified: 

♦  Stop the job if you feel unsafe; 

♦  Always inform supervisor; 

♦  Always complete familiarisation; 

♦  Follow the requirements as defined in management system; 

design and location on board.   

Our member took steps to: 

♦  Revise bridging document with focus on clear communication lines; 

♦  Ensure control of work system was understood by all crew on board; 

♦  Revise risk assessment, training matrix and amended procedures to avoid repetition. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: electric, shock): 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 15/08 – Incident 2: Risk of electrocution during routine work; 

IMCA SF 07/09 – Incident 1: Fatal electrocution; 

IMCA SF 02/10 – Incident 1: Crewman received 440V electric shock; 

IMCA SF 08/11 – Incident 3: Electrician received electric shock. 

3  Diver Injured after being Trapped Underwater  

A member reported an incident which a diver became trapped underwater when the seabed gave way under him during a 
sheet  pile  cutting/removal  operations.    The  incident  occurred  during  the  removal  of  an  abandoned  sheet  pile  quay.    Two 
divers were in the water involved in cutting operations on underwater piles in very shallow (less than 10m) water.  One of 
the divers was doing the horizontal cut to remove the piles when he reported to the supervisor that he could not move his 
legs as they were covered in sand to his calves and subsequently to his chest level.  

The second diver working close by was directed to assist the fist diver, and a third, rescue, diver was deployed.  The crane, 
which was slung with piles, ready to be recovered from the seabed, was made ready to recover the trapped diver as he was 
situated  too  far  from  the  recovery  davit.    The  two  divers  attempted  to  aerate  the  seabed  using  a  caviblaster  to  free  the 
trapped diver but without success.  

Attempts to use the crane to lift the trapped diver to safety by connecting the crane hook to his safety harness resulted in 
damage to his harness and loss of his surface air supply and bailout.  As a matter of extreme urgency the diver was lifted clear 
using the crane and slings around his armpits.  He lost consciousness; and sustained injuries.  Once recovered from the sea, 
he was successfully resuscitated and subsequently transferred to hospital. 

Our members’ on-going investigation noted the following initial conditional findings: 

♦  Before this incident, over one hundred similar piles at this location had been safely dismantled by the contractor’s divers; 

♦ 

Instabilities  and  underwater  anomalies  in  this  area  had  occurred  before,  but  at  the  time  of  the  operation  no  one  was 
aware of this; 

♦  There had been a simulation or drill of unconscious diver recovery made before the job started;  

♦ 

 A minuted ‘tool box’ meeting had been held before the start of the job, attended by the crane operators, divers  and 
vessel crew;  

 
♦  Weather conditions were good, with no waves or current; 

♦  Cutting operations were being conducted according to IMCA guidance and following the rules laid down by the client; 

♦  Communication between the dive supervisor and the divers during the emergency proved difficult owing to the noise of 

the caviblaster; 

♦  The crane hook was too large to pass through the diver’s lifting harness ‘D’ ring so the standby diver attempted to pass 

the hook through the harness directly below the ‘D’ ring resulting in damage to the harness; 

♦  The diver was recovered and resuscitated efficiently and professionally, and the dive team were able to properly use the 

♦  Vital  medical  information  (blood  group)  for  the  injured  diver  was  not  immediately  available  and  was  only  found  with 

tools and techniques required;  

some difficulty. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: Trapped, diver): 

IMCA SF 15/09 – Incident 1: Trapped diver umbilical incident resulting in diver fatality;  

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 03/09 – Incident 1: Diver entrapment.  

4  Alternator Bearing Collapse caused Small Fire 

A member has reported an incident on a workboat used in the offshore wind farm industry, in which there was a serious 
failure of an alternator bearing, leading to a small engine room fire. The vessel crew noticed a sound change from the engines 
and a reduction in revs (dropped by about 100 rpm) followed immediately by the fire alarm. The crew shut the fire flaps, and 
the fuel and ventilation shut off using the emergency stops. The engine room was checked, and smoke and small flames or 
glowing  were  observed  from  the  alternator.  The  fire  was  extinguished,  the  safety  of  crew,  passengers  and  vessel  was 
confirmed, and the vessel returned to port on one engine. 

Figure: showing damaged alternator with shaft out of alignment due to bearing collapse 

 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

♦  The crew were trained to respond to a fire alarm in a certain way and did so in a swift and professional manner; 

♦  The problem was found to have been caused by a bearing collapse in one of the alternators. 

Our member took the following actions: 

♦  All alternators should be checked regularly for signs of damage which may manifest itself as ‘Black fluff’ in the windings; 

♦  When the engines are shut down the alternators should be checked for overheating. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: bearing): 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 09/01 – Incident 3: ROV winch [bearing] failure; 

IMCA SF 10/14 – All incidents on engine room fires. 

 
5  Confined Space Entry – Multiple Fatalities   

The UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) has published the following report regarding an incident in which three 
persons were killed as a result of confined space entry on a cargo vessel in dock.  

Three  crew  members  on  board  the  cargo  vessel  were  found  unconscious  in  the  main  cargo  hold  forward  access 
compartment, which was sited in the vessel’s forecastle (f’ocsle). The crew members were recovered from the compartment 
but, despite intensive resuscitation efforts by their rescuers, they did not survive. The vessel was carrying a cargo of sawn 
timber and, at the time of the incident, shore stevedores were discharging the timber loaded on top of the forward hatch 
cover. Two of the ship’s crew were standing by to clear away the deck cargo’s protective tarpaulins as the timber discharge 
progressed aft.  During this time, the two crewmen entered the forward main hold access compartment. The chief officer, 
who  was  looking  for  the  two  crewmen,  found  the  compartment  hatch  cover  open  and  shouted  down  to  them  before 
climbing into the space. A third crewman saw the chief officer enter the compartment. When he looked down the hatch, he 
saw the chief officer collapse. 

The alarm was raised and an initially frantic rescue operation was undertaken by the vessel’s two remaining crew, and two 
stevedores.  One  of  the  two crewmen  started  the  hold  ventilation  fan,  and  brought  a  breathing  apparatus  (BA)  set  and  an 
emergency escape breathing device (EEBD) to the f’ocsle. He donned the BA set, which did not have a face mask fitted, and 
entered the compartment. Despite having the breathing regulator in his mouth, it was not supplying him with sufficient air. 
Two stevedores also entered the compartment during the rescue: one using the EEBD and another without any breathing 
apparatus whatsoever. While there, they were able to pass lifting slings around the fallen crew so they could be recovered to 
the deck. The crewman and stevedores suffered severe breathing problems when they returned to deck. 

Ambulance paramedics, fire and rescue services and the police subsequently attended. Despite the best efforts of all involved, 
none of the three crewmen who were recovered from the compartment survived. 

The full report can be downloaded from: www.maib.gov.uk/cms_resources.cfm?file=/Safety%20Bulletin3_2014.pdf. 

6  Marine Safe Australia – Hand Injuries 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  from  Marine  Safe  Australia  covering  a  number  of  hand 
injuries including the following: 

♦  Hand injury when folding aluminium ladder 

While folding a four part hinged folding ladder to place it back to its stowage position, a person got his hand squeezed at the hinge 
part;  

♦  Severe hand injury – rotating machinery 

♦  Serious injury - top of thumb amputated  

A newly installed generator was started without belt guards in place. A person’s finger got caught by the V-belt which resulted in 
fracture and deep laceration to the index finger. The potential could have been loss of finger/hand;  

The  V-belts  of  an  air  compressor  were  found  to  be  slack  after  it  was  installed  the  previous  day.  A  crewman  decided  to 
tension/reposition them again. While trying to check the tension of the V-belts, by manually rotating the assembly, his thumb got 
stuck between the V-belt and pulley wheel. This resulted in the top of his thumb being amputated. 

The same safety flash also covers the following incidents: 

♦  Broken ankle due to poorly rigged walkway; 

♦  Man overboard; 

♦  Personal Flotation Device failed to automatically inflate; 

♦  Person struck by tugger wire assembly; 

♦  Person’s leg severed following entanglement. 

 

The  safety  flash  can  be  downloaded  from  www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/marinesafe-australasia-july-
safety-flashes.pdf. 

