AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/15 

Safety Flash 

 July 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Dropped Object Fell from Crane Boom 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which an object was discovered which must have fallen from the crane boom. 
It happened during crane operations when it was noticed that a piece of steel measuring approximately 70mm x 40mm and 
weighing approximately 300g fell from the boom tip area to the deck. It was assumed (and investigation clearly indicated) that 
the object came from the inside of the crane hook pocket. This means that the object fell from approximately 100 metres. 

The DROPS calculator suggests that such an object hitting a person from that height would have caused a fatality.  

Location of incident 

Dropped piece of steel 

 

 

 

Internal condition of crane pocket 

 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following:  

  Continuous movement of the main block inside the crane hook pocket caused damage to such an extent that a piece of 

steel broke loose and fell down; 

  The crane hook pocket had been designed for storing the main block during transportation. The crane hook pocket could 

be locked against the boom using hydraulic pins; 

 
  When using the auxiliary hook the crane hook pocket was locked against the boom. This caused steel on steel movement 

of the main block inside the crane hook pocket when booming up and down; 

  Crane inspections only included load bearing parts of the crane;  

  The crane hook pocket had been designed bearing in mind that the auxiliary hook would not be used frequently;  

  No documentation was available on how this crane hook pocket should be used when using the auxiliary hook (locked 

against the boom or unlocked);  

  An engineering bulletin from the crane manufacturer was not properly taken up by management. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (search words: dropped, crane): 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 04/11 – Crane boom dropped object  

IMCA SF 01/12 – Crane hook block dropped to deck 

IMCA SF 02/15 – Dropped object near miss: Falling crane block. 

2  Dropped Object Near Miss: Antenna Parts Worked Loose and Fell to Deck  

A member has reported a near miss incident in which part of a single side band (SSB) antenna fell off the mast to deck during 
bad weather. The antenna had three parts which were threaded and screwed together. The first part of the antenna was not 
fully screwed into the second part. In high winds, the antenna was waving back and forth in the wind which caused it to loosen 
and become detached. There were no injuries.  

Our member notes that this incident could have had a much more serious outcome had one of the base plates dropped from 
a height. 

SSB antenna above bridge 

Detached antenna shown on deck afterwards 

 

 

 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Damaged antenna was removed from above bridge and replaced with new one; 

  Ensured correct practices were used for securing all navigation/communication equipment at height and/or on masts;  

  Thorough check of all existing equipment above bridge or at height and/or on masts, most especially after installation or 

maintenance by a third party;  

  Crew “time out for safety” carried out emphasizing hazards and risks of working at height and/or on masts, particularly 

the area above the vessel bridge (sometimes called the monkey island). 

The following lessons were learnt: 

  Continual vigilance is called for where there is even the potential for loose objects to fall from height;  

  Visual inspections should be thorough and careful; 

  Equipment at height that is exposed to the elements (for example on masts and on the  monkey island above the bridge) 
should be regularly checked to ensure there is nothing working loose or any loose objects which may fall in bad weather 
conditions. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (search words: mast, dropped): 

 

 

IMCA SF 04/10 Incident 2 –  Falling object [from mast];  

IMCA SF 06/13 Incident 3 – Near miss: dropped object - falling camera. 

 
Members should refer to the following IMCA safety promotional material intended for use by vessel crews:  

 

 

IMCA SPP 04 – Avoiding dropped objects; 

IMCA SPC 12 – Avoiding dropped objects. 

3  Control of Sub-Contractor Personnel: Unplanned and Uncertified Lifting Operations 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which sub-contractors’ lifting operations had to be stopped due to several 
unsafe conditions.  Sub-contractors were found using uncertified lifting equipment, and lifting slings were being used over sharp 
edges of vessel frames.  Work was stopped by shore-based staff visiting the vessel.   

It was found that: 

inappropriate lifting practices; 

  The  crew  and  the  sub-contractor  personnel  were  unaware  that  they  were  engaged  in  potentially  dangerous  and 

  The sub-contractor had conducted no planning or pre-job inspection; 

  Such risk assessment as had taken place, failed to consider all hazards, including the uncertified equipment and unsuitable 

position of lifting slings; 

  The sub-contractor’s supervisor was not present when the operation started;  

  Vessel crew failed to verify safety of job planning and certification of equipment when issuing the permit to work (PTW); 

  Vessel crew and contractors failed to exercise the stop work policy when work was conducted in an unsafe manner. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Stopped the job, held discussion with sub-contractor personnel and vessel crew; 

  After management review, fabricated and welded on a pad eye to facilitate safe lifting activities. 

The following lessons were identified: 

  Proper task risk assessment should be conducted at the planning and implementation stages to ensure that all potential 

hazards are identified and all necessary and required safety precautions are put in place;  

  All equipment used for lifting operations should be properly certified and suitable; 

  All lifting equipment should be inspected before and after use, and certification status should be confirmed accordingly, 

before issue of PTW;  

  There  should  be  appropriate  control  of  sub-contractor’s  personnel.    If  there  is  direct  management  control  of  the 
operations  of  a  sub-contractor,  or  if  contractor  management  has  a  ‘prevailing  influence’  over  the  operations  of  sub-
contractors, then the responsibility for safety generally remains with the contractor.  

 Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (search words: control, sub-contractor, strop):  

 

 

IMCA SF 16/09 Incident 1 – Near miss: Unexpected lowering of a suspended load; 

IMCA SF 10/13 Incident 1 – High potential near miss: Lifting equipment failure. 

4  Poor Storage Leading to Failure and Disintegration of Cutting Discs 

A  number  of  incidents  have  come  to  IMCA’s  attention  in  which  cutting  discs  from  one  manufacturer  have  failed  and 
disintegrated whilst in use.  When using hand-held rotating machinery of this sort, there is great potential for serious harm to 
the operator and anyone nearby should this happen, given that the discs rotate in excess of 12,000rpm.  It was initially suspected 
that this was a manufacturing fault affecting a batch of these discs. 

However,  subsequent  investigation  has  revealed  that  the  cutting  discs  failed  as  a  direct  consequence  of  being  stored  in 
inappropriate conditions.  This followed discussions with the manufacturer of the discs.   Once notified of the problem, the 
manufacturer quickly investigated the circumstances of the disc failures and have identified that the manner in which the discs 
were stored is the most likely root cause of the problem.  Below is an extract from their report: 

“The discs at some point have been subject to damp conditions.  When bonded abrasives are subjected to dampness this often leads to 
a breakdown in the resin which has a very important role of acting as a binding agent in the make-up of the discs.  Bonded abrasives 
should always be stored in dry, frost-free conditions avoiding wide variations in temperature, damp and humidity.  They should always be 
properly protected and supported to prevent damage and distortion.” 

 
It should be noted that there was no evidence that the discs supplied by this manufacturer were at fault in any way.   The 
manner in which the discs were stored was the most likely root cause of the problem. 

Action: Members are encouraged to review the means of storage for all cutting and grinding discs in order to prevent any 
similar occurrence, with particular reference to ensuring that such storage avoids wide variations in temperature, damp and 
humidity. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (search words: disc, cutting, grinding): 

 

IMCA SF 11/11 – Grinding disc with defects. 

Members  should  be  aware  of 
int.com/media/102554/imcaspc11.pdf. 

the 

IMCA  pocket  safety  card  on  cutting  and  grinding  safety,  www.imca-

    

 

5  Daughter Craft Man Overboard Incident 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding a non-fatal man overboard incident.  A vessel was 
on  location  performing  routine  duties.    A  Daughter  Craft  (DC)  had  been  used  for  a  drill  and  was  in  the  process  of  being 
recovered when the boat man engaged in this work fell  backwards  into  the  water  when  the  small boat jerked  to  starboard.  
He was recovered and was uninjured.  No other party was injured during the incident. 

The main conclusion drawn was that the boatman did not secure his safety harness to the harness point and did not convey 
this to the deck crew.  Also, the deck crew lowered the davit wire without confirmation that the boatman was secure.  

Causes: Failure of communication, failure to be aware of safety responsibilities, failure to use PPE appropriately. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-15.19.pdf. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents (search words: man overboard): 

IMCA SF 16/13 Incident 2 – Fatality – Man overboard; 

IMCA SF 02/15 Incident 5 – Near miss – Man overboard. 

 

 

 

 

 
6  Lithium Battery Contents in Eyes  

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which a crewman was splashed in the 
eyes with material from a Lithium battery.  The incident occurred offshore whilst the ship’s Electro Technical Officer (ETO) 
was engaged in the repair of a ship’s instant reaction electronic welders mask.  The tablet style lithium ion battery to the mask 
needed replacing and due to the compact nature of the equipment it was considered that this could only be done by soldering 
connections on to the new battery.  The original mask battery was soldered by machine soldering.  The repair required manual 
soldering for obvious reasons.  The  first  connection  was  made  successfully  and  whilst  soldering  the  second  connection 
the lithium battery overheated and popped causing the battery contents to spray out into the ETO’s eyes.  

Personnel nearby reacted rapidly and correctly applying copious quantities of water to the injured person’s eyes.  There was 
no permanent harm to the injured person’s eyes. 

The root causes of the incident were: 

  Failure to use personal protective equipment (PPE); 

 

 

Inadequate time was allowed between soldering operations for the battery to cool down causing it to over-pressurise and 
fail resulting in the injury; 

Inadequate  work  planning  or  programming  –  the  work  was  seen  as  “everyday”  which  resulted  in  an  inadequate  risk 
assessment. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-15.20.pdf.  

Members should be aware that IMCA provides a useful series of safety prompt cards, one of which is “keep your eyes on 
safety” – www.imca-int.com/media/102581/imcaspc14.pdf. 

 

 

 

