Safety Flash 

 June 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Lifting and Rigging 

All the below incidents involve failure of lifting, rigging or mooring equipment.  In the first, a hydraulic line failure 
led to a crane collapse.  The next two are near misses, one involving someone noticing defects in a subsea lifting 
wire, the other the high potential failure of a mooring rope.  Then we share a National Offshore Petroleum Safety 
and  Environmental  Management  Authority  (NOPSEMA)  alert  on  issues  with  collared  eyebolts  used  as  lifting 
equipment, and finish with a Marine Safety Forum (MSF) near miss report of lifting gear snagged on a load.  

1 

Equipment Failure Leading to Crane Collapse 

What happened? 

A vessel was tied up in port alongside another vessel (double banked).  An attempt was made to lift a 20’ freight 
container  cabin  from a  truck,  onto  the  vessel.   The  crane  of the  inboard  vessel  was  used  for the  operation.   A 
hydraulic line burst and the crane head fell on top of the portacabin.  As a result, the freight container fell between 
the jetty and the inboard vessel, and was badly damaged.  No-one was injured. 

A shore crane was then used to recover the container and place it back on the jetty.  

 

 

 

 

 
What went wrong?  Investigation and findings 

The immediate cause of the collapse of the crane was the failure of the hydraulic line.  

What lessons were learnt?  And what were the actions? 

IMCA notes:  

  Hydraulic lines might burst at any time.  It is of the greatest importance to ensure that regular inspection and 

replacement of such parts is included in the planned maintenance programme; 

  There were significant control of work issues here which were not addressed, in that the crew of the outboard 

vessel used the crane of the inboard vessel with no assurance as to its condition or fitness for the operation. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Hydraulic Hose Failure Caused Collapse of Heavy Haulage Trailer. 

2  Near Miss: Fault Spotted in Subsea Lifting Wire 

What happened? 

During diving operations at 10 msw, it was noticed that there was a slight gap in the lay of the diver launch and 
recovery (LARS) clump weight wire.  The diver was asked to visually inspect the affected area.  It was observed on 
the divers’ helmet camera, and afterwards confirmed by the diver, that no rope strand was broken, only that there 
was strand protrusion from the rope lay/weave.  The following day the rope was re-checked by the dive team & 
client and a few strands of the clump weight rope were found to be out of the rope lay/weave. 

 

  Ropes should be monitored frequently to avoid stress due to uneven movements and weather conditions, and 

What lessons were learnt, and what actions were taken? 

an appropriate record kept; 

  Ropes and sockets should be inspected before each dive; 

  Any small defects, damage or abnormality on ropes should be reported immediately; 

 

Load testing should be carried out as appropriate after any changes and terminations; 

  Precautions should be in place to avoid stress on ropes during diving caused by weather conditions. 

  Ropes with core or strand protrusion should be immediately discarded or, provided the remaining length of 

rope is in a serviceable condition, have the affected section removed.  

See IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations.  Members may also wish to review the following incidents: 

  Damaged wire rope slings; 

  Partial parting of a bell main lift wire. 

 

 
3  High Potential Near Miss: Mooring Rope Parted 

What happened?  

Mooring  buoy  rope  parted  while  the  vessel  was  moored.    No  injuries  or 
damage  to  the  vessel  occurred  apart  from  the  parted  mooring  rope.    The 
potential severity of incident was categorized as “high” owing to the potential 
injuries that could have arisen had someone been in the snap back zone.  

What was the cause?  

Equipment  failure  following  from  wear  &  tear,  in  turn  following  from 
inadequate or insufficient routine inspection. It was evident from inspection 
after the fact that the condition of the mooring rope was bad. 

Lessons Learnt/Preventive Action 

  Planned and regular inspection of mooring ropes; 

 

If mooring ropes are found in poor condition, they should be taken out of 
use; 

  All crew associated with mooring operations should be properly informed 

and fully briefed with regard to: 

 

the mooring operation in general; 

  checking for defects with the ropes; 
  proper precautions relating to keeping out of the snap back zone. 

Members should be aware of existing IMCA documentation as follows: 

 

IMCA SEL 029, IMCA M 214 – Mooring practice safety guidance for offshore vessels when alongside in ports and 
harbours; 

 

IMCA SEL 038 Mooring incidents (video). 

Members may wish to review a list of mooring-related incidents – this can be done by visiting the IMCA website 
safety flash page and entering the appropriate search text (e.g. parted mooring) in the box entitled “Search safety 
flashes…” 

We will highlight two similar incidents here, although in both cases, injury resulted from parted mooring lines:  

 

 

Lost time injury (LTI) during mooring operations; 

  Mooring line failure resulting in serious injury. 

 

 
4  Collared Eyebolts as Lifting Equipment 

What happened? 

NOPSEMA  has  published  Alert  64  relating  to  the  failure  of 
collared eyebolts when used for lifting.  A piece of equipment was 
being lifted during maintenance and repair, when one of the two 
collared eyebolts used to lift it, sheared.  The piece of equipment, 
which weighed 21.7 tonnes, fell a distance of 1.2-1.8m.  There 
were no injuries. 

What were the causes of the incident? 

NOPSEMA  reports  that  the  primary,  immediate  causes  of  the 
incident were as follows: 

  The lifting equipment was configured such that the direction 
of pull was at an angle to the shaft of the eyebolt, so that a 
“fleet angle” from the vertical was created.  Such an angular 
load reduced the Working Load Limit of the eyebolt to a significant degree; 

  The  collar of the eyebolt was not fully flush with the body of the piece of equipment being lifted, causing a 
sheering force due to the fleet angle to be applied to the shaft of the eyebolt, instead of the load being spread 
across the eyebolt and the  surface of the equipment being lifted (as per design); 

  A root cause identified was ineffective lift planning. 

The full Safety Alert can be found on NOPSEMA’s website.  Members may wish to refer to NOPSEMA’s earlier Safety 
Alert 59 Lifting and Rigging Plans. 

Please also refer to IMCA SEL 019, IMCA LR 006, IMCA M 187 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

5  Near Miss: Snagged Lifting Bridle 

What happened 

The MSF has published Safety Alert 17-03 in which lifting rigging got snagged on an open top mini basket type unit.  
The  incident  occurred  on  a  platform  supply  vessel  (PSV)  alongside  an  installation  in  calm  weather.    Whilst 
discharging an open top mini basket type unit, one leg of the basket's lifting bridle snagged on the bottom corner 
of the unit, almost causing it to tip over.    

The  vessel's  deck  crew  immediately  informed  the  installation 
crane operator when they noticed the snagged bridle, and with 
some careful manoeuvring the crane operator managed to free 
the bridle from under the corner of the unit.  The basket was then 
lifted to the installation as normal. 

MSF notes: The vessel deck crew were commended for not rushing 
towards the snagged bridle to free it, as they could have placed 
themselves in a potentially hazardous situation. 

What were the actions? 

  Container manufacturers to consider re-engineering units to 

eliminate/reduce snagging hazards; 

  The length of the unit lifting bridle will be measured to ascertain if it was too long, leading to this incident; 

  The installation crane operator to be informed about any lifts with a potential to snag; 

 

 
  All parties are reminded that good communications between the vessel and the installation crane are essential 

for safe lifting operations. 

Further information and safe operating practices can be found in: 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations;  

 

 

“Best  Practice  for  the  Safe  Packing  &  Handling  of  Cargo  to  &  from  Offshore  Locations"  available  at 
www.onshoreoffshorecargo.com.  

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

 

Lifting bridle snagged – Failure to “stop the job” (also from the MSF). 

 

