AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/15 

Safety Flash 

October 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  Older "Norfolk Range" Powder Extinguishers from Before 2009 

The UK Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has published the following alert regarding a fault in older “Norfolk Range” large 
dry powder fire extinguishers, manufactured  in the United Kingdom  before 2009.  These extinguishers  may be affected by 
moisture ingress at a threaded joint at the base of the unit, rendering the unit inoperable.  The problem may not be identified 
during routine service inspections.  

Users should identify if their extinguishers are likely to be affected.  If yes, and the extinguisher has been left exposed to adverse 
conditions since its last extended service, the condition of the elbow joint at the base of the unit should be examined by a 
competent service engineer. 

If you are unsure if your extinguishers are affected by this safety alert, you may wish to consult your supplier.  

More  detailed  information  is  available  from  the  UK  HSE:  http://www.hse.gov.uk/safetybulletins/norfolk-large-wheeled-dry-
powder-fire-extinguishers.htm. 

 

. 

                              

 

Type of large dry powder extinguisher affected 

The remaining incidents in this safety flash focus on personal injuries. 

 
2  Cargo Contamination Causing LTIs during Clean-Up 

A member has reported an incident in which there was contamination of liquid cargo  on an offshore support  vessel.  The 
incident led to a week-long cleaning operation in which a number of crew became ill and had to take time off work to recover. 
The incident occurred during loading of 50 cubic metres of calcium chloride brine.  As loading started, it was swiftly noticed 
that no cargo was being received into the tank.  The manual valves in the brine system were checked, and it was verified that 
they were open as they should be.  When the loading line was connected to another (amidships) manifold to attempt loading 
from there into the tanks, the same situation was experienced and no cargo received into either tank.  The suspicion arose 
that the line might be blocked, and it was decided that the loading had to be stopped.  To assess the problem, dismantling of 
the line was started.  When the lines were opened it was found that the calcium chloride brine had turned into a crystallized 
white mass, in some places completely packed in, and further into the line system, at the aft crossover line, a gel-like mass, 
blue-greyish in colour, was discovered, which in a tray formed a thicker mass setting to the bottom with a more fluid version 
on the top. 

 

 

Crystallised white mass 

Blue-grey gel-like mass 

 

 

 

The opened lines revealed a crystallized white mass that blocked the system 

 

The subsequent unexpected task of dismantling, cleaning and reassembling the pipes took over one week, involving work from 
both vessel crew and outside contractors.  It had a negative but temporary impact on the health of some personnel involved. 
At the end of the cleaning period, some of the vessel personnel involved in the dismantling of the line system reported the 
following symptoms: 

  Respiratory problems – specifically, it was noticed that some persons were breathing strenuously, two of them even during 
normal speech while sitting down.  Further, one of the individuals with prior light symptoms of asthma, though normally 
independent of his “inhaler”, subsequently reported that use of the “inhaler” had become necessary during this period; 

  Nausea; 

  Fatigue; 

  Discoloured (darkened) urine; 

  Kidney pain. 

Four persons had to take sick leave resulting in lost time injury (LTI).  It is anticipated that all the sick persons will make a full 
recovery, though some months off work were necessary in some cases. 

 
Our member undertook a thorough investigation which noted the following: 

1  With regard to the clogging of the cargo system: 

  The vessel was relatively new and this was only the third time the brine loading system had been in use; 

  On the two previous occasions the cargo had been a silica product known as Sildrill;   

  There were trace quantities of the silica product Sildrill left in the brine loading system after discharging the Sildrill; 

 

It was confirmed that the conditions found in the ship’s brine loading system formed near perfect conditions for a reaction 
between the trace quantities of Sildrill and the calcium chloride brine;  

  The crystallisation in the pipe came about because of chemical changes when the brine came into contact with the silica 

product Sildrill.  These chemical changes caused a gel or solid substance to form in the pipes. 

The immediate causes of the clogging of the cargo system were found to be: 

  Chemical  changes  arising  from  inappropriate  mixing  of  trace  quantities  of  previous  Sildrill  cargo  with  calcium  chloride 

brine; 

  There was a machine failure in that there was an erroneous indication of the valve in the aft crossover line being closed 
while it was 45% open – this led to the flow of cargo going into areas from which it would normally be blocked.  This 
contributed to the clogging. 

The root causes were found to be: 

  Lack of experience and knowledge of this type of cargo – officers involved in the previous two loadings of the Sildrill were 

unfamiliar with what the substance actually was and had no prior experience in dealing with it;  

  Lack of familiarity with the chemical components of the two different types of cargoes: 

  Officers would not have been able to foresee the chemical reaction that occurred when Sildrill and calcium chloride 

brine came into contact with one another 

  To both officers and crew, the perception was that both cargoes were “some sort of brine” and also both cargos were 

considered “harmless”; 

 

Inadequate or incorrect information supplied to the vessel:  

  They were informed by the company logistics department that the cargo was a “brine-like material” 

  Whilst instructions were given to wash the tanks and lines, there was no explicit emphasis on the importance of this 

washing, and, hence, the system was washed to “brine standard” as per company procedures 

  As a result of this, trace quantities of Sildrill were left in the system; 

  Company procedures or standards for cleaning cargo pipework were not adequate. 

2  With regard to the subsequent ill-health of the crew involved in the clean-up operation: 

  Chemical analysis by an independent third party of the blend of substances removed from the brine loading system revealed 

some presence of metals, of which the highest level was the metal Chromium; 

  How this metal got into the pipe system was not confirmed (and confirmation was sought from the manufacturer of the 
pipes that it did not originate from the pipework itself), but notwithstanding that, this metal is a known irritant to the 
human respiratory system. 

The root causes were found to be:  

  There was a common understanding on the vessel regarding the “complete harmlessness of this cargo”, in spite of existing 

information in the Material Safety Data Sheets.  As a result there was inadequate adherence to procedures: 

  Appropriate  risk  assessment  did  not  take  place,  nor  was  there  any  toolbox  talk  before  dismantling  and  cleaning 

operations started 

  There was no Permit to Work (PTW) sought. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

 

Improved communication/instruction programme – ensured vessel crew had better awareness regarding cargo properties; 

  Made improvements to cargo system washing facilities; 

  Made improvements to communications between vessel and logistics department. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: cargo, bulk): 

 
 

IMCA SF 16/14 Incident 4 – Near miss: Incident involving dry bulk pressure system 

3  Line of Fire injury – Man Struck in Face by Hammer 

The International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC) has published a safety flash regarding an incident where a man 
was struck inadvertently in the face with a hammer, leading to “recordable” injuries to his face.  Two crew members were 
hammering up bolts on equipment at a well-head.  During the pre-job meeting the two men had anticipated getting hit with the 
hammer while holding the hammer wrench.  As a defence they tied an 8cm long piece of rope around the hammer wrench so 
that one employee could hold a bind on it while the other man swung the hammer.  As the two men worked their way around 
the stack the man holding the rope ended up in the line of fire as he pulled the rope.  On one of the swings the hammer glanced 
off of the top of the hammer wrench.  Before the employee could stop the forward momentum of the hammer, it made contact 
with the man holding the rope striking him in the mouth resulting in injury.  

Causes: lack of situational awareness, remaining “in the line of fire”. 

See http://www.iadc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/SA-15-07.pdf for further details. 

Members  should  be  reminded  of  IMCA’s  “In  the  line  of  fire”  video  which  can  be  viewed  on-line  or  downloaded  from 
http://www.imca-int.com/safety-environment-and-legislation/safety-environment-and-legislation-videos/sel-036.aspx.    It  is  also 
available on request in DVD format.  

4  RWC – Caught Between: Finger Smashed by Tooling 

IADC has recently published a safety alert in which a crewman suffered multiple  fractures on his right ring finger.  His hand 
was caught in the jaws of a tong latch device used to handle drill pipe.  

The immediate causes of the incident were found to be: 

 

Inappropriate or incorrect tools used for the job; 

  Procedures not followed – handles (green in illustration) were provided but were not used; 

  Complacency – no Job Hazard Analysis (JHA) was performed as the task was seen as “routine”; 

  The tooling was so placed such that the supervising driller could not see what was going on. 

The report can be downloaded from http://www.iadc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/SA-15-05.pdf. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents (search words: caught, finger): 

 

 

IMCA SF 04/12 Incident 1 – Lacerated finger during rigging operations; 

IMCA SF 05/15 Incidents 4, 5 and 6 all relate to hand injuries. 

Members  should  be  aware  that  IMCA  has  a  pocket  safety  card  on  this  topic,  Watch  your  hands  –  you’ve  only  got  one  set! 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/102527/imcaspc08.pdf. 

 

 

 

5  Everyday Activity, Unwanted Outcome: Poor Manual Handling Leads to Back Strain 

A member has reported an incident in which a member of the shore staff injured his back due to the incorrect lifting of a heavy 
box from above head height.  The person was working alone in a container unit onshore, searching for a spare part for an 
engine by individually removing boxes from the shelves to look inside them. 

On  the  top  shelf  (2m  high)  there  was  a  box  with  a  turbocharger  in  it,  which  weighed  approximately  20kg.    Although  the 
contents were clearly labelled on the box, the person was not expecting the weight of the box to be that heavy and had not 
prepared his stance ready to correctly accept the weight. 

When the box was removed from the shelf, it fell to waist height; to avoid damaging the equipment he held on tight to it.  This 
caused a jolt and strain to his back.  Having hurt his back he continued with light duties for the rest of the day.  He had previous 
experience with back strain and did not require to visit an external medical unit. 

Our member noted the following:  

  The box was subsequently repositioned on a lower shelf; 

  Self-applied haste caused the person to not check the label on the box before lifting it off the shelf.   If he had taken the 
time to read the label he would have been warned to position himself in such a way to be able to accept the heavy load 
correctly and without injury; 

  Heavy items should never be placed on the top shelves; they should always, where possible, be stored at waist height 

shelves to promote safer manual handling. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: cargo, spill, leak, container): 

 

 

IMCA SF 11/08 Incident 2 – Incorrect lifting equipment used [leading to spillage of 45l of ethylene glycol]; 

IMCA SF 09/15 Incident 1 – “Routine” task, non-routine result: batteries stored sideways leak battery acid. 

Members should be aware that IMCA has safety promotional material covering manual handling: 

 

IMCA SPC 01 – Manual handling. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

