AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/04 

Safety Flash 

June 2004 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Heave Compensation Software Anomaly 

Keywords:  Lifting 

A member has reported the following information relating to an incident which occurred on one of its vessels fitted with a 
Huisman crane, which is considered important for all cranes fitted with heave compensation systems. 

During  deployment  of  a  work  basket  to  the  seabed,  the  crane  whip  line  unexpectedly  paid  out  twenty  metres  of  wire.  
This resulted in the work basket and some crane wire landing on the seabed in an uncontrolled manner.  At the time of the 
incident, the crane was operating in heave compensation mode. 

Investigations into the incident have highlighted the following situation: 

  During  active  heave  compensation  operations,  most  of  the  winch  speed  capacity  is  used  to  maintain  the  hook  at  a 
constant level in relation to the seabed.  If the crane operator chooses to raise or lower the hook whilst operating in 
this mode and in rough sea conditions, it is possible that the winch might not provide enough speed to maintain the new 
level position, resulting in an unexpected and unwanted movement. 

In  order  to  rectify  this  situation,  the  following  software  modifications  were  carried  out  to  the  active  heave  compensation 
system: 

  The  available  hoisting  or  lowering  speed  of  the  winch  by  means  of  the  joystick  control,  whilst  in  active  heave 
compensation  mode  was  reduced.    This  modification  ensures  that  the  active  heave  compensation  system  has  more 
available winch speed than the operator; 

  The second modification disables joystick control once a set deviation between the theoretical and actual positions of 
the  crane  hook  is  met.    Therefore,  in  rough  sea  conditions  the  winch  will  not  follow  joystick  commands  until  it  has 
caught up with the heave compensation requirements. 

The company wishes to bring this to the attention of all crane operators’ onboard vessels to ensure that they are aware of 
such potential failure situations. 

