AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 23/16 

Safety Flash 

 September 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Dropped Objects 

This safety flash covers five dropped object incidents.  In the first, complacency during routine loading operations 
was the root cause of a dropped pallet spilling of hundreds of kilos of groceries.  In the second, a hood came loose 
from an automatic rolling door in a workshop location – root cause: failure to identify maintenance requirements.   

In  the  third,  a  CCTV  camera  under  repair  fell  from  a  crane  when  the  crane  was  moved,  following  lack  of 
communication during the repair process.  The fourth incident covers failure of bolts resulting in dropped objects 
in pipelay operations.   

The fifth covers the risk of dropped objects – particularly parts of wooden handled hammers – when working at 
height.  

1  Dropped Pallet During Loading of Stores 

A member has reported an incident in which a pallet shed its load during lifting operations, resulting in 900kg of 
groceries falling 7m to the deck below.  The incident occurred during a routine lifting operation from quayside to 
vessel.  Whilst attempting to lower a pallet laden with stores through a deck hatch, the load contacted the corner 
of the hatch, damaging the pallet.   The cellophane wrapping split near the bottom, and the majority of the 902kg 
contents  fell  7.2m  to  the  deck 
area below.  The front right corner 
of  the  pallet  was  hanging  off  but 
did not fall.  

the 

the  pallet  contained 
Although 
multiple 
individual 
items, 
weights  of  the  goods  dropped 
were  significant.    Had  a  person 
been under the load and struck by 
a 
the  potential 
severity  could  have  resulted  in  a 
fatality. 

falling 

item, 

No  one  was  harmed  during  the 
incident  –  however, the storeman 
who was receiving the load at the 
designated  landing  site  had  run 
from the area once the items had 
dropped 
and  had 

to  deck 

 
inadvertently slipped on cooking oil which had spilled from the damaged supplies, causing him to fall to the deck 
onto his hands and knees. 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  Personnel  responsibilities  had  not  been  adequately  established  at  the  tool  box  talk  (TBT)  before  the  lifting 

operation; 

 

 

  A  number  of  crew  members  had  arrived  on  the  worksite  late,  failing  to  attend  the  TBT.    This  resulted  in 

confusion as to who was responsible for the load at what point during the lift; 

In preparation for the lift, and unlike the previous loads, the bosun neglected to use the load securing chain 
on the pallet lifting frame. This oversight had been noticed by the crane operator who did not report it – the 
crane operator felt it was his supervisor’s responsibility and did not want to challenge his superior’s action; 

  A  pallet  lifting  box  was  on-board  the  vessel.  The  pallet  involved  was  too  large  for  this  box.    Had the  pallet 

lifting box been capable of accommodating the pallet in question, it could have prevented the incident; 

 On  lowering  the  pallet  into  the  stores  hatch,  the  crane  operator  was  expecting  instructions  from  the 
banksman who conversely believed that the crane operator had control at this stage. Because of the incorrect 
understanding  and  lack  of  control  from  the  banksman,  the  load  was  lowered  into  the  blind  hole  in  one 
slewing  motion  and  not  in  a  staged  progression  –  this  did  not  allow  for  the  load  to  be  stabilised  and 
centralised before it was lowered through the hatch; 

  The risk assessment did not make reference to the practice of a staged progression; 

  As  a  result  of  the  above,  the  load  had  a  sufficient  degree of  freedom to contact  the  side  of  the  hatch  and 

damage the pallet, resulting in the contents dropping to the deck below. 

Our member identified the following causes: 

  There was insufficient detail recorded in the lift plan and task risk assessment; 

  Personnel responsibilities were not adequately established during the TBT; 

  The load was not sufficiently secured on the pallet – a lifting chain was not used; 

  The crane operator took no action when he noticed the pallet lifting frame chain was not being used; 

  There was no pause above the hatch to secure and centralise the load before lowering. 

The root cause was found to be complacency during “routine” tasks. 

The following contributory factors were noted: 

  Self-imposed/perceived time pressures; 

  No additional rigging was used to secure the contents of the pallet; 

  Pallet lifting box held on-board did not fit the pallet size being used; 

  Not all personnel involved in the operation attended the TBT; 

inappropriate to challenge his supervisor. 

Our member required the following immediate actions: 

  Culture-driven  behaviours  influenced  the  crane  operators’  decision  not  to  report,  as  he  felt  it  was 

  Ensure all personnel involved in an operation attend a toolbox talk (TBT) before taking part in the activity;  

  The TBT should sufficiently outline roles & responsibilities of those involved; 

  Reinforce the ‘STOP THE JOB’ philosophy to work teams prior to conducting an operation; 

  Review  lift  plans  and  task  risk  assessments  for  routine  lifting  operations,  ensuring  they  are  up  to  date  and 

there is sufficient detail surrounding:  
  control of loads 
 

roles & responsibilities of personnel involved 

 

securement of loads 

 

 

 

 

lifting of pallets 

  “Line of Fire” and confirmation of clear areas during blind lowering; 

  Review the method for securing pallet loads ensuring it is adequate for the proposed lift; 

  When  lowering  through  a  blind  hole,  adopt  a  staged  progression  to  the  lift  allowing  for  the  load  to  be 

stabilised and centralised before lowering; 

  Communicate with your work team that time constraints should not impede the safe progress of an activity.  
If there are concerns regarding time constraints and the viability of completing a task, this should be raised 
with the offshore management team or supervisor. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: complacency, lifting): 

IMCA SF 05/11 – Incident 3 – Lack of safety awareness: crush injury during lifting operations; 

IMCA SF 14/15 – Incident 5 – Dropped object near miss: lifting. 

2  High Potential Near Miss – Dropped Object 

A member has reported a high potential dropped object near miss incident.  The incident occurred in a workshop 
location  ashore.    A  section  of  metal  panelling,  which  weighed  5.6kg,  came  loose  from  the  hood  of  a  large 
industrial automatic rolling door and fell 7-10 meters to the ground.  It landed right in front of the fire exit of the 
workshop.   

The  Dropped Objects Preventions Scheme  (DROPS)  calculator tells us that an object  of that weight  falling from 
that height could have resulted in a potential fatality.  

Item dropped approximately 7-10 meters 
from above the main roller shutter door 

Hood panelling had dropped in 

One of the rusted fastening 

front of the main fire exit 

brackets 

 

 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following causal factors: 

  Fastening brackets were rusted; this rusting was caused by water ingress; 

  There was no secondary retention fitted - a practice advocated by DROPS; 

  Whilst the rolling door itself was subject to planned maintenance and inspection, the system did not extend 
to  the  hood  above  the  door,  which  had  not  been  inspected  since  its  installation  approximately  15  years 
before; 

  No dropped objects survey had taken place, which could have identified the actions required to ensure the 

safety of the item. 

 
The root cause of the incident was found to be failure to identify the requirements to ensure the safety of this 
large automatic rolling door – including maintenance, inspection and secondary retention. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Fallen panel was replaced and appropriate secondary retention (self-tapping screws) installed; 

  The remaining panels were all examined and self-tapping screws were fitted as secondary retention; 

  A preliminary dropped object survey was carried out, and annual checks on the hood panel were introduced. 

Dropped  objects  as  a  result  of  corrosion  is  an  important  and  recurring  issue,  and  members  may  wish  to  focus 
attention on it.  Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: dropped, corrosion): 

 

 

IMCA SF 01/12 – Incident 5 – Dropped object: injury resulting from failure caused by corrosion; 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 1 – High potential near miss: safe working load (SWL) plate fell from crane auxiliary 
block. 

3  Dropped Object Fell from Crane – Poor Communication/Lack Of Awareness/Control Of Work 

A member has reported a dropped object incident in which a CCTV camera (weighing 5.8kg) fell approximately 3m 
down a crane pedestal ladder before being arrested by its data cable, which prevented it falling on to the main 
deck.      A  50Te  crane  was  tasked  with  the  recovery  of  subsea  equipment.  During  this  operation  the  crane  was 
started and rotated outboard portside in order to deploy the hook to seabed.  

This 50Te crane was designed with a fixed access ladder, complete with a “backscratcher” from the main deck to 
the  first  level  walkway  on  the  crane  pedestal,  a  height  of  7.4  meters.  From  this  walkway,  there  are  three 
additional ladders fixed to the crane, two of which are for maintenance purposes and the other leads to the crane 
operators control cabin.  These additional ladders rotate with the crane as it is slews in the required direction. 

As the crane was rotated, one of these ladders caught the CCTV camera that had been secured to the walkway 
following maintenance during the previous shift, pulling it approximately 1 meter to the access hatch, where it fell 
before being arrested by the data cable. 

 

 

 

 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The CCTV camera had been removed from its mountings the day before the incident to allow investigation of 

reports that it was not working properly; 

  The faulty camera could not be repaired at the time and as such, was secured to the crane walkway using tie-

wraps; 

  The access hatch located on the walkway was left in an open position while crane operations were ongoing. 
This is common practice and is done to allow suitable access/ogress to and from the crane in the event of a 
crane  breakdown  or  if  a  rescue  operation  is  required.    The  crane  design  prevents  the  hatch  from  being 
opened when one of three ladders are positioned over it, restricting access/egress; 

  The work conducted on the camera and the status in which it was left was not communicated to the  crane 
operator or the project construction crew at shift handover/TBT.  The on-shift crane operator was not made 
aware that work had been conducted on the crane pedestal and did not identify the CCTV camera during the 
pre-use inspection; 

  The  CCTV  repair  was  considered  to  be  covered  under  a  company  “routine  duty  for  work  on  low  voltage 

systems”; 

  The  correct  process  for  approving  “routine  duties”  had  not  been  followed  which  resulted  in  this  particular 

routine duty being absent from the appropriate register of such duties kept on the vessel.   

Lessons learnt, actions taken, and conclusions: 

  There was a lack of awareness and risk perception of the hazard presented by the rotating ladders; 

  A more thorough pre-use inspection of the walkway would have discovered the potential dropped object; 

 

Improved communication – particularly at shift handover – between all parties would have raised awareness 
of the operation; 

  Had this operation been conducted under a permit to work (PTW) or the correct process followed for routine 
duty activities, awareness of the operation would have been greater.  It is important to highlight that control 
measures had been implemented by those conducting the work to ensure safe execution of the task and that 
these were removed when the worksite had been deemed safe; 

  Personnel were clear of the crane pedestal at the time of the incident due to the task being conducted and 
member’s procedures for controlling access to the crane when in use. Our member reviewed processes for 
controlling access to ensure they were robust in protecting personnel from injury.  The safe system of work 
for all ladders on worksites, both permanent and temporary was reviewed, with consideration being given to 
suitability of design, position and access/egress. 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: crane): 

 

IMCA SF 07/11 Incident 4 Near miss: personnel almost caught between crane house and scaffold pipe: 
 

In this rotating crane  incident,  a  direct cause was failure to communicate  -  the crane operator was not 
informed  at  the  start  of  the  work.    Also,  a  ‘last  minute  risk  assessment’  by  the  non-destructive 
examination (NDE) inspector did not reveal the actual risks; there was inadequate initial instruction, and 
information  was  not  communicated  properly  to  all  the  involved  parties.    The  TBT  process  was  not 
conducted  in  accordance  with  established  procedures  and  the  work  process  was  discussed  without 
involvement of all parties (deck crew/crane operator). 

4  Dropped Object – Failure of Split Head Elbow on Bolts  

A member has reported two failures of bolts on the split head elbow resulting in two dropped object incidents 
this year and similar incidents in recent years.  

During pipelay operations, the split head elbow is assembled around the pipeline pawn head for attachment of 
the  product  (pipe)  to  the  storage  reel.  The  elbow  is  a  two-part  socket  bolted  equipment  that  is  fitted  by  the 
construction crew on deck before being pulled in to the reel insert and secured.  

These  bolts  have  failed  on  a  number  of  occasions  during  spooling  or  laying  operations  resulting  in  dropped 
objects.  One contributing factor being considered is the suitability of these bolts for the activity.    

 

 

Our member considered the following actions: 

  Use of a brand new set of bolts for each spooling operation; 

  Careful checks to be made to ascertain that all bolts are new and inspected for defects before each assembly 

operation; 

 
  Further close attention to be paid to the engineering details of the bolts and the torque settings of the split 

head elbow. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

IMCA SF 01/15 – Incident 5 – High potential dropped object.  

5  Working at Height – Use of Wooden Handled Hammers 

A member has drawn to IMCA’s attention a number of incidents involving the use at height of wooden handled 
hammers.  All of these incidents involved the hammer head separating from the handle, and had the potential to 
cause major injury or fatality. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Required crews not to use hammers with wooden handles when working at height; 

  Required  crews  to  use  composite  design  hammers  (single  piece  with  integrated  handles)  when  working  at 

height; 

  Ensured that tools are regularly checked to ensure they are in a serviceable condition and free of homemade 

repairs, and defects (loose heads, etc.); 

  Ensured removal of all wooden handled hammers which were used for work at height. 

Members may wish to encourage circulation of the following safety promotional material: 

IMCA SPP 04 – Avoiding dropped objects; 

IMCA SPC 12 – Avoiding dropped objects. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: tool, working, height): 

IMCA SF 01/06 – Incident 4 – Hammer dropped from height; 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 2 – Near miss: dropped object: 6kg sledge hammer head; 

IMCA SF 14/14 – Incident 5 – High potential dropped object incident. 

 

 

 

 

 

