Safety Flash 

 December 2017 

 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 32/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

1 

Load Exceeding Safe Working Load (SWL) Leads to Overstressed and Damaged Rigging 

What happened? 

During a recent decommissioning operation, shears were used to cut a pipeline.  The shear tool was rigged to the 
crane in a vertical fashion.  The shear tool was placed on the pipeline at the cut location and when the shear jaws 
closed around the pipe to make the cut, the shear tool was pulled downward due to the ‘bird’s beak’ design of the 
jaws. 

As a result, the load quickly increased the tension on the rigging over the safe working limit (SWL) of the rigging 
resulting in damage (deformation) to the rigging.  The crane operator was instructed to immediately reduce load 
to an acceptable level. 

The shear tool was placed on the seabed and the damaged rigging was removed from the arrangement.  The shear 
tool was then re-rigged to the whip line for recovery to the surface. 

This  incident  resulted  in  damage  to  property  (hook  and  shackle)  but  could  easily  have  been  a  good  deal  more 
serious, having the potential to have harmed the diver who was working close to the shear tool. 

 

  Failure to recognize the hazard of the shear tool pulling downward during cutting operations; 

What were the causes? 

The immediate causes of the incident were: 

 

Inadequate preparation/planning. 

The root causes were found to be: 

Lack of knowledge; 

Inadequate communication. 

 

 

 

 
Lessons learnt 

outcome;  

  Placement  of  the  shear  tool  and  the  amount  of  ‘slack’  available  to  make  a  cut  will  have  an  impact  on  the 

  Ensure SWL of rigging arrangement is communicated to crane operator prior to lifting operations; 

  Ensure rigging drawings are available.  If not, a hand sketch should be prepared locally and reviewed/approved 

prior to lifting operations. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search phrase: ‘overstressed’): 

  Tombarra fall wire fatality: Updated reports 

2 

Failure of Steel Wire Sling 

What happened? 

During offshore wind farm construction, pull wires were 
being laid.  One small vessel was acting as a winch vessel, 
and  another  as  an  anchor. 
  These  vessels  were 
connected with a steel wire rope sling.  During wire pull 
operations, the  steel  wire  rope  sling  failed.   When the 
wire failed the energy stored in the steel wire rope sling 
and  the  rigging  arrangement  was  released,  causing 
damage  to the  rigging  arrangement,  load cell, Panama 
chock and the deck of the winch vessel.  There were no 
injuries, as a ‘clear deck’ instruction was in place. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The wire failed at the splice inside the ferrule following 
an  increase  in  tension.    It  was  concluded  that  the 
mechanism of failure was a low-cycle fatigue fracture. 

Further  detailed  investigation  showed  that  dynamic 
forces  on  the  hold-back  or  anchor  arrangements  were 
higher than anticipated, leading to the overstressing and 
therefore the failure of the wire.  These peak forces were 
not picked up during manual logging. 

Similar  failures  have  occurred  due  to  the  splice  failing  under  higher  than  anticipated 
dynamic loading causing the splice to pull from the ferrule. 

Lessons learnt 

  Because the ‘clear deck’ instruction was followed, ensuring that no personnel were in 

the ‘line of fire’, there were no injuries;  

  One of the investigation findings was that an incorrect calculated sling breaking load 
(CSBL) was assumed.  Hence the working load limit (WLL) of the steel wire sling was 
also  incorrect.    When  a  steel  wire  sling  is  assembled,  a  reduction  in  WLL  for  the  assembly  is  applicable 
depending on the end termination and the factor of safety.  In this case, the termination efficiency (KT) for a 
‘super splice’ or ‘super loop’ is 90%.  For example, if the steel wire had a CSBL of 100 Tonnes, a factor of safety 
of 3:1 and a termination efficiency of 0.9, then the assembled wire sling should have a WLL of 30 Tonnes – i.e. 
CSBL = WLL x SF x KT.  This reduction was not included on the certificate’s WLL that came with the assembled 
wire rope sling.  Clear marking, certification and utilisation of equipment must be checked thoroughly when 
new equipment is delivered; 

 

 
  The forces on the wires were measured via a load cell.  These readings of the load cell were logged manually.  
Data logging should be automated allowing continuous (digital) logging of the load cell data.  This data can then 
be used to check which forces are being exerted on wires and if workability limits are reached. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Near miss: Corrosion caused crane boom failure during heavy lifting 

  Failure of hose reel bearing housing 

3  Arm Injury Whilst Using Pillar Drill  

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) reports another incident wherein a 
crew person was injured following misuse of a pillar drill.  Crew were 
in the process of using a piece of 2mm metal plate to manufacture a 
metal  blank  for  a  pipe  on  the  vessel’s  hot  water  system.    It  was 
necessary to drill a small hole (6mm) at one end of the plate.  For this 
operation,  it  was  decided  to  use  the  workshop  pillar  drill.    Whilst 
drilling the metal plate the drill bit became stuck.  This then forced the 
metal plate out of the drill vice.  When the operator reached up to 
stop  the  machine  the  metal  plate  that  was  stuck  to  the  drill  bit 
dislodged, flew off the drill bit and hit his left arm. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The MSF alert identifies the following issues: 

  The task had not been properly risk assessed; 

  The wrong tool had been selected for the job; 

  The vice holding the job had not been sufficiently tightened; 

  The speed of the drill had not been adjusted for drilling metal; 

  The injured person was “not wearing his personal protective equipment (PPE) correctly”. 

The MSF alert can be found here www.marinesafetyforum.org/images/msf-safety-alert-17.14.pdf. 

It is conspicuous that this is the third incident reported during 2017 in which crew have injured themselves whilst 
using a pillar drill.  Members may wish to reiterate to their crews the fundamentals of safety when working with 
rotating machines of all kinds. Please refer to the following similar incidents: 

  Hand injury whilst using pillar drill (MSF) 

  Finger injury during work with rotating machinery 

4 

Finger Injury While Using a Crowbar to Try to Shift a Large Shackle 

What happened? 

During anchor handling operations, one anchor was on deck and crew were required to connect a wire socket to 
the  anchor  by  using  a  shackle.    The  wire  socket  was  in  a  difficult  position  for  the  shackle  to  be  connected;  to 
overcome this difficulty, the deck crew used a crowbar to try to get these items aligned.  The crowbar eventually 
slipped while it was in use for the shackle’s pin connection and consequently a crew member suffered an injury to 
the right ring finger. 

 

 
The injured person received first aid treatment on board.  He was subsequently sent to a barge to be checked by 
an available medic.  The recommendation of the medic was that he be sent to hospital ashore. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Similar incidents involving connection/disconnection of shackles are known to the industry, and have often led to 
serious injury.  Causes identified include inadequate identification of pinch points, and improper use of tools. 

Lessons learnt 

  Hazards can be hidden and risky situations may not always be identified; 

  All crew members involved in similar tasks should be aware that use of crowbars on rigging under tension is 
not  safe.    Capstans  or  tugger  winches  should  be  used  to  reposition  chains,  wires  or  anchors.    Only  after 
everything is safe and without residual tension should the rigging team perform manual work; 

  Another point to remember: never place your hand (or any part of your body) ‘in the line of fire’. 

This is a recent incident and is still under investigation.  Any additional lessons learnt identified will be communicated 
following the investigation completion. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

Lost time injury (LTI): Gangway deployment  
 

[A crowbar was used to exert pressure on the lower section of the gangway, to allow the outboard pin to be 
removed.  During this process, both the bosun and the AB were standing within the steps of the gangway 
when an outboard pin jumped out this section slid up quickly and trapped the bosun and able seaman.  This 
extremely serious incident could have been avoided entirely by following the correct procedures.] 

5  Unplanned Release of Stored Energy: Worker Struck and Injured by Tensioning Tool 

What happened? 

The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP) has published Safety Alert 293 about an incident in 
which a worker was struck on the head and seriously injured when a tensioning tool came loose and hit him. 

A four-yearly task was in progress, to check the tension of bolts on the bearing of a floating storage and offloading 
(FSO) unit turret.  During moving the bolt tensioner, a part (the puller, weighing 13kg) fell between the bearing stud 
bolts of the inner (static) and outer (rotating) bearing races.  Before it could be removed the FSO weathervaned, 
trapping and compressing the tensioner part between the two rings of bolts.  A crew member went to investigate 
further.  As he crouched over the tensioner part, it suddenly came free and struck him in the head causing serious 
injury.  He was promptly medevaced to hospital onshore. 

Turret working location 

Tensioner part trapped between bearing race stud 

 

 

bolts 

 

 
What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The risk of a tensioner part falling and becoming trapped between the stud bolts was not recognised in the job 

safety analysis (JSA), work procedure or turret vendor documentation; 

  This risk was not recognised by the crew member, who placed himself ‘in the line of fire’; 

  No stop work authority was applied when the task deviated from the expected work process; 

  The design of the turret bearing races and stud bolts location allowed the tensioner part to become trapped 

and compressed when the FSO weathervaned. 

Actions taken 

  Provide additional safeguarding tools and equipment to prevent the tensioner puller from dropping in between 
the inner and outer stud bolt or even this tool and equipment could help to support the re-tensioner while 
moving along the race; 

 

Investigate a manual handling tool that will reduce the risk of accidentally dropping the tensioner parts; 

  Review  the  JSA  and  work  procedure  to  include  routine  and  unexpected  risks  and  provide  troubleshooting 

guidance.  Include JSA to consider weather limits for the work and use of a tug on the FSO stern; 

  Reinforce use of stop work authority if work deviates from normal conditions.  Investigate if this task should 

be performed by a specialist contractor rather than the FSO crew; 

  Develop ‘line of fire’ awareness training; 

  Share information with other operating assets with a FPSO and future project FSO, to design out the hazard, 

e.g. put the two bearing races and rings of bolts at different elevations. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents relating to the unplanned release of stored energy: 

  Stored energy near miss: Person nearly hit by equipment caught during light daughtercraft operations 

  High potential stored energy incident: Inner buoyancy module clamp failure during removal 

  Fatality: Stored pressure release 

6  Near Miss: Worker Temporarily Trapped in Confined Space 

What happened? 

On a vessel in a shipyard, a member of the painting team accessed a tank 
to  perform  an  inspection.    Around  three  hours  later,  a  worker  was 
assigned to close this tank, and this was done – but the painter was still 
inside.  The painter  only noticed he was trapped in the  tank around 15 
minutes after the manhole cover was closed.  Fortunately, in less than an 
hour,  personnel  assigned  to  cleaning  duties  outside  the  tank’s 
surrounding could hear knocking sounds from inside the tank and called 
for  assistance to  investigate.    The manhole  cover  was  opened,  and the 
painter was able to exit the tank unharmed.  Further check-ups with a doctor confirmed no impacts to his health 
and safety.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  There was no stand-by person outside the tank; 

  The painter entered the tank alone, even though the ‘buddy system’ was a practice expected by the shipyard; 

  The painter accessing the tank was a team leader and as such, had specific training for confined space entry, 

but still disregarded the implementation of control measures; 

  There was no valid permit to work (PTW) in place for the task, and hence there were no control measures in 

place, such as safe atmosphere monitoring, ventilation, or illumination. 

 

 
Lessons learnt 

A safety stand-down was led and conducted by the shipyard management with their employees.  While this incident 
happened  to  shipyard  workers  during  shipbuilding,  the  lessons  learnt  are  applicable  to  all  IMCA  members 
operations. 

This incident is under investigation and further updates may be communicated in future. 

Members may wish to review the following IMCA documentation and safety promotional material: 

 

IMCA SEL 032 – Guidance on safety in shipyards 

  Short video – Confined space: The dangers 

  Short video – Permit to work 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Confined space entry incidents – a reminder 

  Confined space fatality in shipyard 

 

