Safety Flash 

December 2016 

IMCA Safety Flash 34/16 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  Offshore Crane Safety Systems 

The  UK  Health  and  Safety  Executive  (HSE)  has  published  the  following  safety  alert  covering  two  recent  crane 
incidents in which the crane boom upper hoist limit systems failed to prevent the crane booms from being hoisted 
up too far and against the boom backstops.  The continued hoisting resulted in the booms fully compressing the 
boom backstops, causing high loading on the boom upper main chords with the eventual catastrophic failure of the 
booms.  Measures should be in place to verify the correct operation and the correct settings of all safety systems 
and limits on offshore cranes. 

Incident 1 

Incident 2  

Pre-use checks on a diesel hydraulic crane fitted with 
a  pneumatic  control  system  failed  to  identify  or 
question why the boom hoist upper limit system was 
not functioning in the manner  detailed  in the crane 
operation manual. 

This malfunction was the result of an omission to fit a 
blanking  plug  in  a  pneumatic  valve  in  the  control 
system.    A  fault  developed  in  the  boom  hydraulic 
pump actuator which allowed the boom to continue 
hoisting  after  the  control  lever  was  returned  to 
neutral.  This fault in the pneumatic  control system 
allowed  the  boom  to  be  hoisted  beyond  both  the 
upper  hoist  operational  limit  and  the  upper  hoist 
ultimate limit. 

The HSE alert suggests the following actions: 

The boom upper hoist operational limit on an electric 
crane  had  been  deliberately  defeated  to  allow  the 
boom  to  be  hoisted  up  to  a  position  which  would 
allow the crane to be rotated through 360 degrees. 

This activity may have been conducted on the basis 
that  the  boom  upper  hoist  ultimate  limit  would 
provide protection. 

Unfortunately, this ultimate limit had not been set to 
operate at the correct angle of the boom.  The boom 
was  therefore  hoisted  up  too  far  and  against  the 
boom backstops, leading to the failure of the boom 
before this ultimate limit was activated. 

  Ensure that the inspection and the function testing of the safety systems on offshore cranes are sufficiently 

robust to verify that they operate in the manner described in the crane operation manual; 

  Ensure  that  inspection  and  function  testing  includes  verifying  that  the  boom  hoisting  limits  operate  at  the 

angles of the boom specified in the crane operation manual; 

  Where  cranes  are  fitted  with  ultimate  boom  limits  advice  should  be  obtained  from  the  manufacturer  or  a 
suitably competent person as to the method and frequency of the tests required to verify the correct operation 
and setting of these limits.  These tests – particularly if carried out by simulation – should be robust enough to 
ensure all operational components are tested and that the system operates at the correct angle of the boom. 

The full alert can be found here.  Members may wish to refer to  IMCA SEL 019 – Guidance on lifting operations. 

 

 

 

 
2  Dropped Object Near Miss: Crane Rest Damage 

A member has reported an incident in which a section of H-beam steel plate fell from a crane boom rest.  The 
incident occurred during the booming up of the vessel’s aft crane.  The main hook “headache ball” or hook snagged 
the adjoining  twin fall main block  storage  structure H Beam (Photo 1).    This caused a 50 cm  section of storage 
structure H-beam steel plate to be damaged (Photo 2).  The H-beam section, weighing 20 kg, fell 40-50 cm into the 
main hook bucket which is 2 m in depth (Photo 3).  There was a risk potential for the steel plate to have fallen 4.3 
m to the vessel deck area below. 

 

Aft crane 

 

Section of H-beam (post collision with 

headache ball and hook) 

Section of damaged H-beam 

 

Further investigation of this incident is on-going.  Our members’ initial investigation revealed the following: 

  No Banksman in place for removing the crane from the rest; 

 

Ineffective communications between the crane operator and the banksman. 

 

 
3  Near Miss – Dropped Steel Plate 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which a steel plate weighing over 1kg fell at least 4.8m to the ground.  
The incident occurred when a vessel main crane was being prepared to recover a work basket from the seabed.  A 
rigger (banksman) was assisting the crane movement by dogging the crane boom out of the crane crutch (boom 
rest) – in accordance with company lifting operations procedures.  As the crane 
boom rose, the rigger heard two distinct noises of a dropped object. 

Upon investigation, a steel plate (1.38 kg), later identified as sea-fastening dog 
plate,  had  fallen  from  the  crane  crutch,  struck  an  access  platform  and  fell  a 
further  4.82m  to  deck.    While  there  was  no-one  in  the  vicinity  at  the  time, 
according  to  the  Drops  Calculator  the  falling  steel  plate  had  the  potential  to 
cause a serious injury. 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

  Following  examination  of  the  crane  crutch  along  with  records  of  recent 
dropped object inspections of the area, it was concluded that the dog plate 
had been placed on the crane crutch Teflon pad and the movement of the 
crane  boom  as  it was  raised  and  lowered  out  of  the  crane  crutch over  a 
period of time, had ‘rocked’ the plate aft to the edge of the pad until it fell; 

  The dog plate did not originate from the project and was of an unknown 

origin.  The vessel had been in a shipyard for crane refurbishment 
work.  This had included scaffold work around the crane crutch 
immediately before mobilisation; 

  The dog plate had been used by the scaffold team that worked on 
the  crane  crutch.    It  was  likely  that  the  plate  had  been  placed, 
inadvertently or otherwise on the crane crutch Teflon pad by one 
of the scaffold team; 

  The root causes of this incident were an inadequate crane boom 
inspection process and inadequate control or supervision of the 
yard scaffold crew. 

Conclusion and lessons learned: 

  Dropped objects often can be attributed to a lack of access for proper dropped object inspection; 

  Crane boom rests are a common source of dropped objects due to the dynamic nature of landing crane booms 

and the lack of easy access to the top of the crane boom rest for inspection of the pads and fittings; 

  Crane boom rests and all items located on the rest should be subjected to regular and robust dropped object 

inspection through a planned maintenance system;  

  Drops or Crane Boom Rest Inspections should be conducted in a manner where there is clear visual assess to 

boom pads either by direct access or other acceptable means; 

  Drops inspection report sheets should provide clear instructions and guidance on conducting a robust drops 

inspection and should be added to Planned Maintenance Work Orders for completion; 

  Supervisors controlling maintenance or refurbishment works of 3rd party contractors should be satisfied that 

the worksite is safe and in good order upon completion of all works. 

Dropped object incidents or near miss incidents comprise 12% of all the incidents reported to IMCA during 2016. 
Members attention is drawn to IMCA SF 33/16 – Incident 3 – Near miss: dropped object from crane, which includes 
a summary and links to all the dropped object incidents reported in the last two years. 

 

 
4 

Fatal Fall from Height  

The UK  HSE  reports that an international engineering company has been sentenced 
following the death of a worker who fell 10m to his death from an electricity pylon.  A 
rigger had been working with a colleague preparing the pylons in readiness for painters 
to carry out maintenance work.  On the morning of the incident, he arrived at the job 
to find that the painters had already started painting even though the pylon had not 
been rigged. 

He climbed approximately 10m up the pylon, when he fell backwards, narrowly missing 
one of the painters working directly below him.  As a result of the fall, he sustained 
serious multiple injuries and died at the scene. 

The investigation found a number of failures in the management of risks arising from work at height.  Although the 
company had a system of work they failed to implement, monitor and enforce this system.   This failing exposed 
their employees to the risk of death. 

After the hearing, a HSE Inspector noted: 

“The company were clearly aware of the hazards involved with pylon work and had a system in place to manage the 
risks.  Unfortunately, they failed to implement, monitor and enforce this system of work.  In addition, they failed to 
ensure the proper inspection and provision of safety critical personal protective equipment.” 

The press release can be found here. 

This incident is passed onto members because it highlights the potentially fatal consequences of failing to properly 
manage risk at the worksite. Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: failure, manage, 
risk): 

 

IMCA SF 07/16 – Incident 2 – Mooring: port operator fined after worker injured by capstan. 

5  High Potential Near Miss: Failure in Safety Gate 

Step Change in Safety has published the following safety alert regarding a near miss incident in which there was a 
potentially very serious failure of a safety gate at height.  During a routine inspection, whilst stepping from a ladder 
onto a gantry, the crewman performing 
the 
inspection  discovered  that  the 
safety gate bar was adrift from its hinge 
bracket. 
  The  crewman  narrowly 
avoided a fall.  He replaced the gate bar 
and  immediately  reported  the  event. 
There were no injuries.  

Investigation  revealed  that  a  retaining 
plate and bolt were missing due to the 
bolt working its way loose.  The bar was 
repaired immediately.  Ongoing checks of all such safety gates took place to ensure they are functioning correctly 
and safely.  In the long term, a review was arranged of the maintenance strategy of the safety gates. 

The full report can be  found  here.  Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words:  gate, 
failure): 

 

IMCA SF 04/16 – Incident 1 – Near miss: non-fatal man overboard incident. 

 

