Safety Flash 

 November 2016 

IMCA Safety Flash 31/16 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Diving Incidents 

This safety flash contains five incidents related to diving.  In the first, a diver lost consciousness briefly following a 
blow back.  In the second, a diver injured his hand recovering damaged equipment from the seabed.  The third is a 
most interesting near miss incident in which a diver was approached and harassed by a Leopard Seal.  The fourth 
incident  relates  to  the  consequences  of  incorrect  installation  of  hose  fittings,  and  the  fifth  to  the  build-up  of 
hydrogen gas inside the cockpit of a Self-Propelled Hyperbaric Lifeboat. 

1  Diver Loss of Consciousness During Underwater Burning Activities 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver lost consciousness during underwater burning activities.  The 
incident occurred during decommissioning and removal of a subsea structure.  Originally planned to be completed 
using cold cutting techniques, issues were experienced when attempting to remove the flowline towhead within 
the structure using cold cutting techniques.  Bolts and gusset plates on the securing collar were understood to be 
preventing  removal  of  the  towhead.    A  management  of  change  (MoC)  and  a  specific  risk  assessment  (SRA)  for 
underwater burning operations was conducted, to assess the risks in burning these bolts and gusset plates. 

Following this risk assessment, the removal of the bolts, gusset plates and other cuts were completed successfully 
and without incident using burning equipment.  The diver was nearing completion of the final horizontal cut on the 
securing collar doubler plate when a suspected ‘blow back’ occurred.  This ‘blow back’ is believed to have caused 
the diver to lose consciousness. 

Showing horizontal cut on doubler plate 

Showing diver position at the moment of the suspected blowback 

 

 

 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  The  initial  task,  which  was  risk  assessed,  ultimately  changed.    As  the  task  evolved  this  change  was  not 
recognised and the job was not stopped and re-assessed.  There was a perception that the scope of work and 
associated risks had not actually changed – the additional burning required was not recognised as change and 
the job was not stopped and re-assessed; 

  The SRA was not collectively reviewed by the offshore team conducting the task.  Some control measures within 

the risk assessment were not adhered to; 

  The company procedure for burning operations and use of burning equipment was not fully complied with; 

  The diver and dive supervisor were experienced in burning operations; however, it is an activity which no longer 

commonly takes place; 

burning operations; 

  The  engineers  responsible  for  the  development  of  the  procedures  had  limited  experience  in  underwater 

  The immediate cause was believed to be a build-up of gas in a location within the doubler plate and structure, 
which had not been identified in the risk assessment or procedure as a hazard.  As the investigation remains 
ongoing, the root cause of the incident cannot be fully determined until the structure has been recovered to 
surface and assessed further. 

Our member drew the following lessons from the incident: 

  This incident highlighted challenges regarding necessary competencies for underwater burning operations.  As 
this  methodology  is  not  widely  used  everywhere,  it  can  be  a  challenge  to  maintain  the  required  level  of 
competency; 

  Decommissioning, particularly of older assets, is becoming more prevalent and presents additional hazards not 

routinely encountered during IRM or construction activities; 

  Consulting detailed as-found surveys before the development of engineering procedures for decommissioning 
may prove a good use of time and effort.  This will allow for early identification of potential hazards and will 
assist in the identification and implementation of the appropriate mitigations to manage the risks presented;  

  The importance of being able to verify that personnel are fully aware of, understand and are able to follow 

company procedures. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Suspended underwater burning operations until the root cause of this incident has been fully determined and 
a programme established and verified to ensure all lessons learned/actions from this incident have been met; 

  Assessment of the company systems and processes for: 

  assurance of competency of personnel 
  effective MoC 
 

identification and adequate control of risk 

  ensuring personnel comply with company process and procedures; 

  Thorough review of dive project plans and scope of work procedures; 

  Verification with client of ‘As Built’/‘As Found’ information and data; 

  A review of the operational MoC and SRA process to determine opportunities for improvement in relation to 

the timeline of this specific incident. 

Our  member  notes  that  experience  has  shown  that  we  should  ‘expect  the  unexpected’  in  decommissioning 
operations, and that therefore the MoC process becomes even more critical. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: diver, blowback): 

 

 IMCA SF 05/04 – Incident 7 – Underwater explosions. 

 

 
2  Hand Injury During Diving Operations  

A member has reported an incident in which a diver received a hand injury during diving operations.  The event 
occurred  during  joint  rectification  activities  on  a  riser  flange  at 
169 msw, following a report of a leak during commissioning.  The 
divers were de-tensioning the flanges, and once the flanges were 
separated, the ring joint became free and fell off the middle of 
the flange to the seabed.  A diver went to recover the ring joint 
from  mud  unaware  that  it  was  damaged  (see  photo  showing 
details of damaged ring joint). 

The  damaged  part  of  the  ring  joint  punctured  the  divers’  soft 
neoprene glove and caused two small penetration wounds to his 
right hand, between the thumb and index finger (see below).  The 
injured diver returned to the diving bell and received first aid (the 
wounds were washed with fresh water and cleaned).  The bell run was terminated. 

Once the bell was locked on, the injured diver returned to the Sat chamber and received further treatment by the 
Diver Medic Technician (advised by on-board doctor and company Hyperbaric Doctor) including: 

  Further thorough cleaning of the wounds with antiseptic solution, an application of antibacterial cream and the 

dressing of the wound; 

  Tetanus vaccination and oral antibiotics as preventive measures. 

 

 

 

Our member noted the following: 

  The ring joint had been installed on a previous diving project by another diving subcontractor; 

  The ring joint came free and fell down into the mud as soon as the flanges were separated; 

  There was no chance for the diver to ascertain the ring joint conditions; 

  This occurrence was unlikely – it was the first occurrence in over twenty years of a similarly damaged ring joint; 

  The direct causes of the incident were found to be: 

 

improper installation of the ring joint during a previous diving campaign with consequent deformation and 
damage of the latter 

 

ring joint falling to the seabed 

  mud on the seabed; 

  Other causal factors identified were: 

  great difficulty in ascertaining the condition of the ring joint before recovery from the mud 
 

the diver’s gloves (fit for diving purpose) were not designed to protect against cut and perforation. 

 

  Before recovery from mud by hand of potentially damaged equipment having possible sharp edges or points, 

 
 The following actions were taken to avoid the recurrence of the event: 

divers should:  
  wear anti-cut/anti-perforation gloves 
  perform a preliminary check of the equipment using a hook. 

Members may wish to refer to IMCA SF 28/16 which focuses on hand injuries. 

3  Near Miss – Leopard Seal Interference with Diver 

A member has  reported a near miss incident  in which diving operations had to be  aborted when leopard seals 
started interfering.  The incident occurred during IRM operations on an SPM and PLEM in the South Atlantic.  Whilst 
all  divers,  equipment  and  animals  were  unharmed,  the  potential  risk  of  harm  was  very  high  and  could  not  be 
ignored. 

Leopard  Seals  are  apex  marine  predators 
that typically grow to over 3m in length and 
over 500kg in weight.  

In  the  first  instance  the  animals  were 
displaying a high level of curiosity, showing 
a gaping mouth and fast circling around the 
diver.    The  diver  was  safely  recovered  to 
the  LARS  basket  and  brought  back  to 
surface as the Leopard Seal got closer and 
closer.    The  Leopard  Seal  continued  to 
remain in the area, beaching itself on the floating hoses, but after a period of no sightings, diving operations were 
resumed. 

A week later the diver was working on the subsea valves when he received a 
strong push from behind.  The diver took refuge between the valves whilst 
the animal closely investigated the diver, again with high speed swimming 
and a wide open mouth. The diver was brought back to the LARS basket and 
recovered  to  surface  but  the  seal  forced  the  diver  to  take  refuge  in  the 
bottom of the basket during the ascent.  The diver was badly shaken by the 
experience.  

After  consultation  with  British  Antarctic  Survey,  divers,  underwater 
cameramen and environmental researchers who regularly dive in the South 
Atlantic and Antarctic waters, the following procedures were put in place: 

  A watch for marine mammals should be in place for 30 minutes before 

starting a dive; 

  The  marine  mammal  watch  should  be  maintained  throughout  diving 
operations.  If a Leopard Seal, or an Orca (killer whale), be seen, this is to 
be communicated to Dive Control and the diver recovered to deck;  

 

If the Leopard Seal comes into contact with the diver, 
the diver is to return as calmly as possible to the LARS 
basket  along  the  seabed,  keeping  arms  close  to  the 
body, and not touching or pushing the animal;  

  Midwater swimming is to be avoided when a Leopard 
Seal is known to be in the area – travel in the basket 
instead;  

  Diving operations should be  suspended until 4 hours 

after the last sighting of the Leopard Seal. 

4  Correct Installation Methods for Diving Umbilicals and Hoses 

A member has reported an incident in which a complaint was received about an odour or smell in a divers’ breathing 
hose  or  gas  hose.    It  was  discovered  that  the  umbilical  hose  fittings  had  been  installed  in  a  way  that  was  not 
recommended by the manufacturer.  The purpose of this safety flash incident is to explain a safety issue that exists 
with some methods used to install fittings and the use of re-usable fittings on diving umbilicals and hoses. 

Fittings on 3/8” Gas Hoses (HDA0106) were installed 

 

 
Fittings on the ¼” Pneumo Hose (HDA0104) were 

with three metal bands;  

installed with a single metal band;  

 

Red arrow indicating cut jacket, exposing braid 

Fitting installed on the ½” Hot Water Hose (HDA1108) were re-usable fittings. 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Our member noted the following: 

  Use of the illustrated methods for fitting hoses in the field can compromise diver safety; 

  The illustrated methods are  not  recommended or approved by manufacturers, nor is the use  of re-useable 

fittings; 

  The use of re-useable fittings can lead to pressure loss and/or water ingress, which can occur when the outer 
jacket of the hoses is compromised.  This can lead to catastrophic failure at the fitting if the metal bands were 
to compromise the pressure control braid in the hoses – see above middle photograph; 

  Water ingress into the hose layers can contribute to the build-up of bacteria leading to hose odours. 

The following recommendations were made by our member: 

  Use only standard fittings involving a swaging or crimping technique;  

  Do not remove bend restrictors from the hoses as this can allow movement at or around the fitting that could 

lead to early damage of the fitting spigot and accelerate the damage to the hose jackets and linings; 

  Do not use reusable fittings as they can fail or come off at pressure if not exactly sized and correctly installed. 

Showing crimped fittings 

 

 

Showing a bend restrictor 

 

Proper care of hoses applies, of course, not only to diving umbilicals but also to hoses used for hydraulics, and hoses 
used for Oxy-Arc systems.  Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

 IMCA SF 16/14 – Incident 5 – Ruptured hydraulic hoses. 

5 

SPHL Battery Charging – Build-Up of Hydrogen  

A member has reported an incident in which there was a  build-up of  hydrogen  gas inside the cockpit of a  Self-
Propelled Hyperbaric Lifeboat (SPHL), and has submitted information to IMCA for use in a safety flash.  

 

 
The following points were noted: 

  Many  designs  of  battery  charging  ventilation  systems  consist  of  a  forced  air  system  from  battery 
compartments/boxes in order to comply with IMCA D 055 – Prevention of explosions during battery charging 
in relation to diving systems; 

  The members SPHL had a ventilation system consisting of a fan on one battery box that pushed air through a 
further two battery boxes via vent pipes to a discharge pipe overboard.  This was complemented by an alarm 
system if the fan failed; 

It was discovered that there was no flow in the ventilation system; 

It was shown in this case that if the vent pipes are blocked or have a restricted flow then the fan alarm will not 
register; 

In this particular incident, the original equipment manufacturer indicated that faulty battery lid seals have also 
been recorded as a potential problem (causing venting through the lid and into the cockpit instead of the vent 
pipe). 

For designs of HLB battery charging systems that consist of a forced ventilation system, our member recommended 
the following actions: 

  Check that fan(s) are operational and unobstructed; 

  Check vent pipe openings on the inside of any battery boxes are clear of obstructions; 

  Check vent pipes between boxes are free from damage (not kinked); 

  Check battery lid seals are intact and lid catches are fully engaged; 

  Check  there  is  a  flow  through  the  actual  system  (easiest  method  is  to  put  a  polythene  bag  over  the  final 

discharge vent pipe); 

  Modify planned maintenance systems to require a weekly check of the air flow of the ventilation system; 

 

If the final discharge point is on the outboard side of the SPHL, then check the flow by disconnecting the vent 
pipe from the hull penetration inside the cockpit, using a polythene bag or similar over the pipe. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words, build, hydrogen, battery): 

 

IMCA SF 05/13 –  Incident 1  –  Explosion  causing fatal injury during maintenance of metocean buoy  [battery 
explosion]. 

Members may wish to refer to the UK Health and Safety Executive (HSE) industry guidance Using electric storage 
batteries safely which can be found here. 

 

 

 

 

