AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/07 

Safety Flash 

August 2007 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

1 

 Wire Inserts in Anchor Line Parted 

A member has reported an incident in which wire inserts parted in two anchor lines of a semi-submersible accommodation 
unit connected to a fixed platform during extreme weather conditions (9 m seas, 70 knot winds).  Non-essential personnel 
were taken off the semi-submersible accommodation unit until the mooring system could be safely recovered and replaced. 

During recovery of the mooring system it was discovered that the wire inserts in both the affected mooring lines had slipped 
out of the socket at the rig end.  The wire inserts were taken ashore for investigation. 

Following investigation the following was noted: 

the failed wire inserts had not been moulded on to the sockets using proper procedures; 

the supplier of the failed wire inserts was not aware of the procedure and its personnel were not formally trained in the 
moulding operation; 

the  supplier  of  the  wire  inserts  and  other  contract-specific  anchoring  equipment  had  not  been  audited  by  this  or  any 
other customer; 

♦  similar incidents regarding wires slipping out of sockets had occurred but had not been brought to public attention; 

there was a detailed investigation of the design of the mooring system.  The system used mooring lines supported by 
buoys, but it was not possible to ascertain that this was directly causative. 

The company recommended the following: 

♦  higher awareness of procedures for moulding sockets on to wires and increased training for personnel engaged in such 

work to ensure that personnel involved are properly qualified for the work; 

♦  audit of suppliers of contract specific mooring equipment for appropriate quality management system; 

♦ 

free sharing of similar incidents to prevent recurrence of incident; 

♦  research into testing wires with moulded sockets. 

2  Failure of Chamber Door Hydraulic Actuator 

A member has reported the failure of a transfer under pressure (TUP) door hydraulic actuator.  After divers had transferred 
from the chamber into the bell, an attempt was made to close the upper door using the hydraulic hand pump.  The hydraulic 
actuator failed, causing the door to drop.  Safety procedures in place prevented any injury to the divers. 

Failed actuator 

 

 

Upon  further  investigation  it  transpired  that  the  heliox  gas  mix  had  managed  to  migrate  past  the  seals  inside  the  rotary 
actuator  and  had  pushed  the  hydraulic  fluid  out  of  the  hydraulic  lines,  losing  hydraulic  control  of  opening  and  closing  the 
door.  

The actuator was removed from the chamber and stripped down completely.  All the seals inside the actuator were found to 
be completely perished inside.  

This particular actuator had never been removed, stripped and seals checked for over ten years due to the inaccessibility of 
the unit and being hidden under deck plating. 

Members  are  reminded  of  the  importance  of  identifying  critical  components  and  the  subsequent  inclusion  of  these 
components into the planned maintenance systems. 

3  Failure of Chamber Door Spindles and Seals 

A  member’s  diving  support  vessel  (DSV)  had  recently  completed  a  period  of  maintenance  with  some  minor  work  on  the 
saturation chamber system, which included door hinge realignment. 

During pressurisation of the divers, a leak was identified from the lock between the two occupied chambers.  Pressurisation 
was halted at 5 msw and the system surfaced for repair.  On completion of the repair the system was again pressurised when 
a different leak on the same door caused the pressurisation to be halted at 8 msw. 

Both leaks were identified as being at the seals in the door spindle shafts that passed through the chamber doors to enable 
the retaining ‘dogs’ to be operated from both sides of the chamber door.  The two leakages prompted an inspection of all 
the door spindles in the system, identifying the following: 

♦  There was no history available on the spindles or seals, as they were not part of the planned maintenance system. 

♦  Almost 70% of the door spindles were found to be unserviceable due to surface damage in the sealing area or bending of 

the shafts and required replacement. 

1. Shaft damage.  2. Shaft surface damage.  3. Door spindles in place in chamber door. 

 

The following points are highlighted to members who have diving systems configured with spindles through chamber doors: 

♦  The door spindles and associated seals should be identified as critical components. 

♦ 

Inspection and replacement of the door spindles and seals should be included in the planned maintenance system. 

 

4  Loss of Subsurface Buoys 

A  member has  reported  an incident  in  which  a  number of  subsurface buoys – used as  part  of the anchoring  system  for  a 
semi-submersible accommodation unit – broke loose and drifted away.  Due to operational restrictions on certain fields it 
had been necessary for certain operations to add fibre inserts, wire inserts and/or subsurface buoys to keep anchorlines over 
pipelines and the concrete base structure of fixed platforms. 

For two such operations the field layout was such that these buoys were underwater when the submersible accommodation 
unit was stood off from the platform, whereas when the submersible accommodation unit was alongside, the rigging of the 
anchor chains meant that some of these buoys came close to the surface. 

Mooring of submersible accommodation units needs to ensure sufficient clearance to pipelines both in alongside, gangway-
connected mode and in stand-off position when the rig is winched away from the fixed platform. 

Since the submersible accommodation unit was in the alongside position most of the time, these buoys were subject to wave 
loads throughout the operation.  As a result, on both these operations some of the buoys close to the surface broke loose 
and drifted away. 

The  company  developed  an  alternate  technique  using  ‘chain  through’  type  buoys,  which  improved  the  operation  of  buoys 
close to the surface.  The mooring chain passes through the centre of the buoy and is secured on each side.  This removes 
the need for a pennant,which is often a weak link, and also places the buoy much deeper and clear of surface wave action. 

5  Failure of an Air Lift Bag Attachment Point 

A member has reported that a diver lost control of an air lift bag being used as a diver aid during construction activities.  

The lift bag had a lifting capacity of 500 kg and was attached to a spool-piece by both its rigging and an inverter line which 
was in place to invert and deflate the bag should the rigging have failed. 

The inverter line was attached to one of the handling loops on the top of the bag.  When the lift bag was required to be 
deflated, the bag dump valve was unable to be operated, leaving the lift bag inflated.  The decision was taken to cut the rigging 
attaching the bag to the load in an attempt to invert the bag using the inverter line.  When the rigging was cut, the inverter 
line came under tension and the attachment point (handling loop) on top of the bag failed.  This allowed the lift bag to freely 
ascend to the surface. 

Handling loop attachment point failure 

 

The subsequent investigation by the member company highlighted the following: 

♦  Some lower capacity lifting bags in use do not have a dedicated inverter line attachment point. 

♦  Many lift bags in use have webbing loops and handles which are intended to assist with manual handling and may not be 

suitable for use as attachment points for lines and rigging. 

♦  Some lift bags that do have dedicated fit-for-purpose inverter line attachment points may not be clearly marked as such.  

Members  are  reminded  that  air  lift  bags  from  different  manufacturers  may  vary  in  configuration  and  that  inverter  line 
attachment points may vary further, depending on the size and capacity of the lift bag. 

Members are reminded of the importance of identifying the inverter line attachment point on lift bags and that this point is 
certified fit for purpose and clearly identified as such. 

Members are also reminded to refer to guidance document IMCA D 016 Rev. 3 – Underwater Air Lift Bags. 

