AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 22/16 

Safety Flash 

 September 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This  safety  flash  has  no  common  theme  or  focal  point  other  than  to  bring  to  members’  attention  some  basic 
safety principles in a number of different areas of work.  The first incident is a confined space fatality of the most 
tragic and frequent kind, where someone lost his life going in unprepared, to rescue someone else.  The second 
incident is a “line of fire” near miss where someone unwittingly placed themselves in the bight of a cable. 

The third and fourth incidents are from the UK Marine Safety Forum (MSF).  One is a dropped object near miss, 
the other, a cargo handling incident highlighting the importance of “stopping the job” in unsafe conditions.  The 
fifth incident, from Seaheath.dk, covers an equipment failure which led to someone being severely scalded. 

1  Confined Space Fatality – Sharp Lady 

The 
Isle  of  Man  Ship  Registry  has  published  Casualty 
Investigation  Report  No.  CA118  on  a  confined  space  entry 
fatality that occurred on a crude tanker.   The incident occurred 
after discharging crude oil.  Equipment was lost at the bottom of 
a tank.  It was decided that once the discharge was finished and 
crude oil washing completed, the equipment should be retrieved 
before  loading  the  next  cargo  into  this  tank,  to  avoid  any 
potential damage to the ship’s equipment. 

The  Chief  Officer  and  Cadet  entered  the  cargo  tank  after  an 
enclosed  space  work  permit  and  risk  assessment  had  been 
completed.    When  the  Chief  Officer  and  Cadet  reached  the 
bottom  of  the  cargo  tank  they  felt  debilitating  effects  of 
hydrocarbon vapour present at the lower level of the cargo tank.  Both the Chief Officer and Cadet attempted to 
activate their Emergency Escape Breathing Devices (EEBD) and exit the cargo tank. 

The  Master observed  the  Cadet  in  difficulty  and  quickly  entered the  tank,  ignoring  the  advice of  a  fellow  crew 
member.    The Chief  Officer  successfully  exited  the  cargo  tank  but  the  Cadet  had  collapsed  unconscious on  the 
tank  bottom.    When  the  Master  reached  the  tank  bottom  to  aid  the  Cadet  he  was  overcome  by  hydrocarbon 
vapour and collapsed. 

The alarm was raised and a rescue was quickly initiated.  The Master and Cadet were retrieved from the bottom 
of the cargo tank and brought to the main deck where first aid was administered.  The report concludes that the 
Master  died  and  the  Cadet  was  injured  as  a  result  of  entering  the  cargo  tank  containing  a  concentration  of 
hydrocarbon vapour at the bottom of the cargo tank.  The ship’s safety procedures for enclosed space were not 

 
fully  complied  with  and  the  risk  posed  by  the  hydrocarbon  vapour  measured  in  the  cargo  tank  was  not 
appreciated by those involved in the tank entry preparations. 

The  report  also  concludes  that  opportunities  were  missed  on  board  to  stop  the  tank  entry  by  several 
crewmembers and that the death of the Master could have been prevented had the safety procedures on board 
been followed in full. 

The full report can be found here.  A summarised version of this report has also been circulated by the Nautical 
Institute MARS system – please see here. 

Members are reminded of IMCA’s safety material – safety video IMCA SEL 034: Working in confined spaces. 

2  Near Miss During Cable Handling – Standing in the Bight 

A member has reported a near miss potential “line of fire” incident during cable handling operations in which a 
member of the  deck  crew  stood  close to  a  heavy  duty  cable  that was  about  to  come  under tension.   With  the 
recovered cable bight secured to a deck stopper, one of the deck crew was working in the vicinity of the cable just 
prior to cutting the bight.  The Master observed the crew member’s unsafe position and exercised a “stop work” 
to prevent potential injury.  

 
Diagram outlining positions at the time “Stop Work” was 

 
Diagram outlining the crewman’s position – directly in 

exercised; 

the “Line of Fire” - if the cable had been cut. 

The hatched area indicates the “Snap Back” zone and 

the red line, the possible path of the cable  

A  Safety  Observation  was  raised  and  discussed  at  the  Safety  Committee  meeting,  and  all  deck  crew  were 
reminded of “lines of fire” and to keep clear of “snap back zones” in the vicinity of cable, wires and ropes. 

The incident serves to reiterate the need for awareness of the “line of fire” and “snap back zones”.  Whenever 
working with cables, wires and ropes, be aware of the surroundings and any actual or potential hazards.  Watch 
out for team mates – keep an eye on all colleagues to ensure they are safe at all times.  Never be afraid to “stop 
work” – whenever unsafe acts or conditions are encounters, stop the job and do not restart until you are safe to 
do so. 

Whilst this is not  strictly a mooring incident, the issues  involved  –  wires  and ropes  under  tension, risk of snap-
back, standing in the “line of fire” - are the same.  Members may wish to refer to the following incidents:  

 

 

IMCA SF 04-09 – Incident 3 – Mooring incidents – from the UK P&I Club: 

IMCA SF 07/16 – Incident 2 – Mooring: port operator fined after worker injured by capstan. 

 
Guidance and safety promotional is also available from IMCA: 

 

 

 

IMCA safety video – IMCA SEL 036: In the line of fire; 

IMCA safety video – IMCA SEL 038:Safe Mooring;  

IMCA Safety Poster – IMCA SPP 12: Mooring safety . 

3  Potential Dropped Object During Cargo Offloading Operations 

The MSF has published a safety alert regarding a potential dropped object.  Following cargo offloading operations 
from a vessel to an offshore platform, the platform crew notified the vessel that a post cover had been found on 
top  of  a  mud  skip  that  had  been  received  from  the  vessel.    The  post  cover  had  the  potential  to  be  a  dropped 
object of major consequence.  The post cover weighed approximately 4kg. 

The post cover had been removed while lashings were fitted to cargo.  The post cover was placed on top of the 
mud skip and not been removed before the oncoming shift hooking the off-going mud skip onto the crane.  The 
post cover had gone unnoticed and the mud skip was offloaded to the platform.  Post covers are known to come 
free during adverse weather and previous incidents have involved the lodging of post covers in forklift pockets of 
containers. 

Investigation identified one immediate cause and one root cause:  

 

Immediate Cause – Crew member left post cover on top of mud skip during cargo operations; 

  Root  Cause  –  No  process  in  place  for  managing  the  removal  and  replacement  of  post  covers  during  cargo 

operations.   

 

Further information can be found here.  

4 

Lifting Bridle Snagged – Failure to “Stop The Job” 

The  MSF  has  published  the  following  safety  alert  regarding  lifting  during  cargo  operations.    A  Platform  Supply 
Vessel  (PSV)  was  working  alongside  an  offshore  installation  carrying  out  cargo  operations,  which  included  the 
discharge of a small cargo basket.  After unhooking the previous back loaded cargo carrying unit (CCU), crewmen 
‘walked the crane’ approximately 15 metres and hooked on a cargo basket – they then left the area and the crane 
began to take the strain.  As the slack was being taken up, the lifting bridle caught under the lid of the basket.  
Fortunately,  the  crane  driver  noticed  the  lifting  bridle  snagging  and  lowered  the  load.    Both  the  crewmen  had 
walked away from the basket in different directions neither observing the basket being lifted, and so neither were 
aware that the lifting bridle had snagged, nor could they see each other to highlight the problem. 

After a short time both  crewmen made  their way back to the basket and cleared the lifting bridles.   They then 
stood clear in a safe haven nearby while the crane took up the slack but once again the lifting bridle caught on the 
lid, this time buckling the lid exposing the cargo inside.  

 

The MSF made the following points: 

  All involved (both on the vessel & on the installation) were reported as experienced in PSV operations;  

  The crewmen on board the vessel routinely carried radios to maintain contact with the bridge and crane.  All 

were reported as fully operational although they did not routinely talk to the crane driver during every lift; 

  As the incident progressed there was minimal communication between the crane operator and the crewmen 

regarding what problems were being encountered and how they would proceed; 

  The  full  operation  and  difficulties  encountered  were  witnessed  by  at  least  three  persons,  none  of  whom 

 

“stopped the job”. 

Please see Safety Alert MSF 16-15 here. 

5  Crewman Badly Scalded During Tank Cleaning  

Seahealth.DK  (http://www.seahealth.dk)  has  circulated  a  report  of  an  incident  during  tank  cleaning  in  which  a 
crewman  was  badly  scalded,  receiving  first  and  second  degree  burns  over  a  third  of  his  body.    The  incident 
occurred  during  hot  water  cleaning  on  lube  oil  tanks,  when  cleaning  machines  were  exchanged  between 
sequences of cargo tanks.  When changing sequence, the tank cleaning hose, when pressurized, opened up and 
hot sea water released freely from the line.  The injured party was positioned alone right in front of the hydrant 

 
and not expecting the failure.  None of the crew saw what caused the failure, but they noticed steam clouds from 
hot water coming off the hydrant and the injured person next to the hydrant. 

Another crewman jumped towards the valve to close it down.  The injured person was sitting down under shock 
and not responding.  He was helped to undress and put under running freely safety shower to cool down. 

 

Investigation noted the following: 

  The  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  used  for  this  operation  were  boiler  suits,  safety  shoes,  safety 

goggles, helmets, safety gloves, all according to company procedures; 

  The  plan  for  the  tank  cleaning  had  been  discussed  and  a  risk  assessment  had  taken  place  as  part  of  the 

procedures;  

  The sequence in which the tanks were to be cleaned had been agreed before preparations started; 

  Tank  cleaning  hoses  for  the  next  sequence  of  cleaning  were  prepared  in  advance  and  connected  to  the 

system during the previous sequence; 

  The cleaning temperature was approx. 80 °C; 

  At  the  time  of  the  incident  six  crew  members were  working on  deck:  Bosun,  pumpman, two  AB's  and  two 

  Crew were standing by different tanks opening and shutting down appropriate tank cleaning machines. 

seamen; 

Immediate cause 

Investigation  revealed  that  the  most  likely  cause  was  that  the  securing  mechanism/locking  mechanism  for  the 
camlock coupling was either defective or not properly locked, leading to the coupling to break off when pressure 
was applied.  When the hose was found, after it had gone off the connection point, one of the locking handles 
was found broken off; the shaft missing and the gasket was found on the deck. 

