AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/12 

Safety Flash 

October 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  LTI: Hand Injury 

A member has reported an incident in which a worker sustained a serious injury to his right hand.  The incident occurred in 
an onshore mechanical workshop.  The injured person was attempting to cut a small block of wood down to size to use as a 
spacer.  Whilst using the mechanical workshop vertical band-saw his hand came into contact with the moving blade, causing a 
serious laceration to the back of the hand and resulting in tendon damage. 

Position of hand and wood during incident  

Band-saw with guard set to lowest position 

 

 

 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦ 

Immediate causes: 
–  The wood split during cutting due to the application of excessive force to the wood, which was caused by excessive 

wear on the blade and the incorrect positioning of the wood; 

–  A “Push stick” was not used; 
–  An adjustable guard was not used. 

♦  Root causes: 

 

– 

Lack of hazard awareness/complacency – the injured person did not identify using the machine as a hazard and did 
not use the available safety guards and processes whilst operating the saw; 

–  Uncondoned  behaviour/violation  –  the  injured  person  identified  a  fault  with  the  saw  but  continued  to  operate  it 

without reporting the fault.   

 
Our member took the following actions: 

♦  Workshop/Yard  Induction  form  to  be  reviewed  and  updated  to  include  specific  mention  of  Safety  Observation  Card 

requirements, Stop the Job requirements and section relating to machinery operation and competence; 

♦  Review of induction frequency requirements and inclusion into site management procedures; 

♦  Prepare and issue pre-use checklists for each machine with requirements for inspection prior to use, following use and 

reporting requirements where faults have been identified; 

♦ 

Implement locking e-stop system with controlled key access to prevent unauthorised use; 

♦  Update risk assessment with lessons learned from incident investigation where pertinent.  

2  Near Miss: Dropped Object 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which a turnbuckle pin weighing approximately 2kg fell more than 12m to 
deck.  The incident occurred on a third party construction support vessel used for pipe laying.  The vessel has a gutter to 
guide the flexible pipe into the vertical tensioner.  It is able to slew left and right to allow the flexible pipe to approach from 
various angles.  This gutter was to be held in place using a combination of turnbuckle, chain and shackles (see photographs 
below.)  Whilst installing the turnbuckle securing arrangement, the retaining pin of the turnbuckle was dropped more than 
12m to deck.  There were no injuries. 

Using  the  DROPS  Calculator  as  a  benchmark  in  the  classification  of  the  potential  consequences  of  a  dropped  object,  our 
member  determined  that  the  outcome  of  dropping  the  turnbuckle  pin  could  have  resulted 
fatality

in  a 

 Location of turnbuckle pin (L) and where the turnbuckle pin fell from (R) 

 

 

Securing of shackle pins used at height with wire 

Our member investigated the incident and as a result implemented a simple secondary securing method to prevent dropped 
objects. 

 

 
Members’ attention is drawn to the following IMCA material which may be of assistance: 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SEL 019 Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA SPP 04 Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 05 Lifting equipment 

IMCA SPC 06 Working at height 

IMCA SPC 12 Avoiding dropped objects 

Members may also find useful information from www.dropsonline.com 

3  LTI: Crush Injury - Arm Trapped by Movement of Crane Block 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crew  member  broke  his  arm.    The  incident  occurred  as  the  vessel  was 
approaching  port  when  a  crew  member  released  the  securings  for  the  main  crane  block.    The  block  started  to  move  and 
inflicted a crush injury resulting in a broken arm and subsequent medical evacuation.  

The vessel was rolling due to the sea conditions and vessel manoeuvring.  The injured person went to the crane pedestal to 
remove the sea fastenings from the main block in preparation for crane operations in port.  As the injured person loosened 
the sea fastenings, the ship rolled causing the block to move clear of the bucket, and his right arm was caught between the 
swinging block and a steel upright.  The impact caused lacerations to the inside and back of the upper right arm resulting in 
bleeding and fracture to the humerus (forearm) bone.  

Crane block 

Crane block and upright showing how crane block moved 

   

 

 

Our member’s investigation drew the following conclusions: 

♦  The  movement  of  the  block  which  caused  the  injury  was  directly  caused  by  the  removal  of  sea  fastenings  too  soon 
before the vessel had actually arrived in port.  This allowed the main block to move as the vessel rolled.  The main block 
had been securely fastened up to this time and throughout the vessel transit; 

♦  The  main  block  bucket  had  been  altered  with  a  section  having  been  removed  to  house  a  slightly  larger  block,  this 

resulted in the block requiring cargo straps to secure it in position;  

♦  The  injured  person  was  working  alone  at  the  time  of  the  incident  and  had  neither  been  requested,  nor  sought 

permission to carry out this task.  

In addition to internal discussion of the incident, our member took the following actions: 

♦  To review lone working policy on vessels to ensure all personnel are aware of the dangers and responsibilities of lone 

working, and to inform others when potentially working alone around the vessel; 

♦  Ensure active supervision to prevent personnel undertaking tasks without prior notification; 

♦  To  undertake  learning  and  information  campaigns  to  help  raise  hazard  awareness:  if  personnel  can  correctly  identify 

hazards then they can take the correct actions to mitigate risks; 

Members are encouraged to make use of the following IMCA safety promotional material in relation to this incident: 

IMCA SPC 16 Caught between and pinch points: What you should know 

IMCA SPP 09 Watch out for pinch points 

♦ 

♦ 

 

 
4  Near Miss: Faulty Lifebuoys Discovered 

A member has reported an incident in which defects were discovered on several lifebuoys aboard a company-owned vessel.  
During routine life-saving appliance checks, it was noted the plug/stopper on one of the lifebuoys was missing.  The position 
where the plug/stopper should have been is shown in the photographs below.  These should have been put in place by the 
manufacturer.  In this instance, the lack of the plug had resulted in one lifebuoy being full of water with a resultant loss of 
buoyancy.  A further four lifebuoys were found to have the plugs missing. 

The lifebuoy type was EVAL, E.G. Vallianatos S.P.A Greece, Code 559. 

Members are recommended to conduct a visual check and, where necessary, a weight check on all lifebuoys onboard for this 
potential  issue.    It  is  recommended  to  amend  onboard  planned  maintenance  schedules  such  that  that  they  include  quality 
control checks and inspection of lifebuoys.  

Lifebuoy Plug/stopper insert location covered by retro-reflective tape 

 

 

Lifebuoy Plug/stopper insert location showing lack of plug when tape removed 

5  Able Seaman Injured by Shifting Cargo 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  the  following  Safety  Flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  a  crewman  was 
injured by unstable cargo that shifted when the vessel rolled. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.40.pdf 

 

