AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/09 

Safety Flash 

October 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of Gas Supply to Diving Bell 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  there  was  a  failure  of  the  breathing  system  in  a  diving  bell.    During  diving 
operations at a storage depth of 102 metres, bell checks were being carried out on one of the bells.  The bellman did a full 
function test on the built-in-breathing system (BIBS) of the bell and it was established that the gas supply system had reduced 
flow to the BIBS at depth.  After getting all divers to put on their own individual BIBS in the bell, to test the gas system, it was 
found that there was reduced and insufficient gas to supply the full dive team in the bell. 

The following actions were taken as part of the investigation. 

The dive team made similar checks on the BIBS in the second (port side) diving bell and the same problem was discovered.  
The starboard bell was surfaced and BIBS was then checked at the surface.  The BIBS system could supply three divers at the 
surface, but under pressure the supply to the divers was inadequate. 

The dive system was a new build and it was the first time it had been at a depth of 102 metres.  The BIBS system had not 
been fully tested at this depth.  The regulators were stripped to check for defects and none were found.  A test rig was then 
set up in the workshop to mimic the BIBS arrangement and the pressure in the diving bell, where the flow was similarly found 
to be inadequate. 

The problem was solved by fitting a higher performance regulator.  This was found to give a far better flow rate on surface.  
The bell was then blown back down to storage depth, all three divers donned BIBS and a full function test was carried out.  
Good flow was reported from all divers.  The same process was repeated with the port side diving bell with good results. 

The company involved drew the following lessons from the incident: 

♦  A full function test of the breathing system (BIBS and dive hats/band masks) at all maximum working depths should be 

conducted whenever there is significant change, including the following occasions: 
–  when a new build saturation system is first put into commission 
– 
– 

if the depth range of the dive system has changed to a deeper depth 
following any changes, any maintenance or any modifications 

♦ 

It can be shown that during set-up for any new dive operations (e.g. at new locations or new depths) a simple purge of 
the BIBS and dive hats/band masks is not adequate to establish the full functionality of the breathing system. 

2  Torn Ankle Ligaments 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the attached safety flash concerning a crew member injured whilst stepping from one 
vessel to another when no gangway was available. 

3 

'Potential Threat to Aviation Posed by Skysails 

We  have  received  two  safety  alerts  –  from  CHC  Helicopter  and  the  European  Organisation  for  Safety  of  Air  Navigation 
(Eurocontrol) – concerning a recent incident involving a Skysail, an experimental supplement to standard ship propulsion. 

 

 

 

 

 

  

31st August 2009 

Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 09/30 
 
Issued: 
 
Subject:    Torn Ankle Ligaments 
 
Summary:  
 
A vessel was moored along side another ship, port side too. No means of gangway was 
available, due to the fact that the lay out of both vessels differed.  He climbed from the rail 
fence  of  the  vessel  on  to  the  fence  of  the  vessel  alongside,  turning  around  with  his  face 
towards  his  own  vessel  and  placed  his  right  foot  on  an  edge  of  a  hole  of  the  deck  (see 
picture for clarification). Because he stepped on this edge (which is about 3 cm high) he 
twisted his right ankle resulting in the injury as described. He was aware of the grid, but did 
not see the edge around it.  
 
Facts found during the investigation 
The  following  facts  were  acknowledged  and 
recognised as a contributing factor.  
 
•  Edge  is  the  same  colour  as  the  surrounding 
deck  
•  Due  to  the  different  shape  of  both  vessels,  no 
means of gangway was installed  
• Crewmember did not see where he put his right 
foot,  possibly  caused  by  the  shadows  of  the 
railwork.  
 
Preventive  actions  Using  a  gangway  when 
leaving the ship or coming on board is essential. 
All efforts must be taken to avoid people climbing 
and  scrambling  from  one  vessel  to  another. 
When  alongside  other  vessels,  contact  your 
colleague on the other vessel, when you think a 
safe passageway can not be created.   
 
The  vessel  where  the  accident  took  place  has 
been requested to mark the edges in a different 
colour, to pinpoint the difference in height.  
 
We advise all vessels to check all decks and identify and mark all possible obstacles.  
 
The involved crewmember resumed his job, after 7 weeks of absence. 
 
Watch  your  step  when  walking  around  your  vessel.  A  miss-step  is  easily  made;  the 
consequences can be very severe! 

 

 

 

CHC Helicopter  
CHC Helicopter  
Safety Alert 
Safety Alert 

Area:  Southern North Sea 

Operation:  Oil & Gas 

Contact: 

Duncan Trapp, Safety & 
Regulatory Manager, EO 

 
Title: Potential Threat to Aviation from Skysails  
 
Brief Account of Events: 
 
The aircraft was descending to the operating area in the 
Dutch offshore sector and identified a large kite/skysail 
flying at around 1000 ft (just below the clouds) ahead of a 
vessel. 
 
The ‘skysail’ itself was in the flightpath of the aircraft as it 
headed towards a nearby installation and, although difficult 
to see against the cloudy backdrop, was seen to be 
moving around ahead of the vessel in an erratic manner.  
The long cable, on which the skysail was extended, was 
also difficult to see. 
 
The vessel can be seen in the picture below with the 
‘skysail’ circled in red.  The approximate line of the cable 
has also been marked on the picture. 
 
Details of the vessel, its location and the potential threat to 
aviation posed by the ‘kite’ were passed to the local ATC 
unit and onwards to the Coastguard.  
 
The crew advised another nearby platform that the vessel 
was moving towards their operating area and also 
informed base operations as soon as possible. 
 
Further research has shown that this is one of the first in a 
line of ‘experimental’ vessels using ‘skysails’ to 
supplement the traditional propulsion units. 

Date of Incident:  15 Sep 09 
Incident Location:  Offshore 

Contact details: 

+44 (0) 1224 846455 
dtrapp@chc.ca 

 
Findings: 
 
Root Cause(s) (Preliminary Findings): 

The introduction of new, ‘environmentally-
friendly’ propulsion methods posing a 
potential threat to aviation. 
 
CHC’s Response: 
 
The following actions must be adhered to: 

 

The issue has been raised with the Dutch 
Coastguard and the Regulatory Authorities to 
allow them to consider the issue in broader 
terms. 
 
Interim solutions will be explored to identify 
the potential threat posed by this specific 
vessel when operating under Skysail within 
the Southern North Sea. 
 
For now, all crews are to be aware of the 
existence of this threat and should report any 
sightings through the local ATC frequency to 
allow other aviation assets to be made aware. 
 
In addition, events such as those described 
are to be reported using the CHC Safety & 
Quality Integrated Database (SQID). 
 
 
For absolutely every decision we 

make, safety must be the first 

consideration!" 

Sylvain Allard, President and CEO

 

CHCSA-200X-0X 
 

This information does not supersede any Company or OEM manual  

 

Safety Information Only 

 

Safety Warning Message 
• Safety 
Subject: 
• Origin:  
• Date: 
• Distribution:  Aviation Safety Professionals  

Maritime kite flying incident   

Aircraft Operator   

17/09/2009 

SYNOPSIS 

  EUROCONTROL Agency has been informed of an incident that happened on 15 

September 2009 over the Southern North Sea: 

o  “The aircraft was descending and identified a large kite/skysail flying ahead of 

the vessel and at around 1000 ft (just below the clouds). 
 
It was attached to the vessel and was in the flight path of the aircraft as it 
headed towards a nearby installation. The 'skysail' was extended on a long 
cable and was moving around the vessel in an erratic manner 
 
Further research has shown that this is one of the first in a line of ‘experimental’ 
vessels using ‘skysails’ to supplement the traditional propulsion units.” 

  The photograph below is an illustrative example of a “skysail”: 

 

 

 

YOUR ATTENTION IS REQUIRED 

  Aviation Authorities are invited to review their kite flying legislation, rules, applicable 

constrains and required coordination.   

  Aviation Service Providers are invited to note the subject and investigate the relevance in 

their operational environment. 

  Aviation Professionals are invited to share their knowledge and experience about the 

described issue. 
 

DISCLAIMER 
© European Organisation for Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) September 2009. 
This alert is published by EUROCONTROL for information purposes. It may be copied in whole or in part, provided that 
EUROCONTROL is mentioned as the source and to the extent justified by the non-commercial use (not for sale).  The 
information in this document may not be modified without prior written permission from EUROCONTROL.  

The use of the document is at the user’s sole risk and responsibility. EUROCONTROL expressly disclaim any and all 
warranties with respect to any content within the alert, express or implied.  

 

 

