A

B

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/03 

August 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss – Modification of Machinery 

Keywords:  Near-miss 

A member has advised of the following near miss.  A mechanic was working on a jet pump when a bracket holding the jet 
hose failed.  The bracket was being used to rack jet hose.  When falling, the hose could potentially have struck the mechanic 
and caused injury.  Fortunately it did not. 

Investigation showed that the bracket had been welded to the jet pump in the field and appeared to have failed upon the 
equipment returning from a project. 

The company has noted the following: 

lifting options; 

  Welding or cutting reduces the designed strength of a frame and can causing lifting points and/or the frame to fail during 

  Any modifications to standard-configuration equipment needed ‘in the field’ should be considered using the company’s 

management of change procedure prior to them being carried out; 

  Any such modifications will only be made after completion and approval of the management of change process, involving 

rotating stock and safety personnel; 

  Any such modifications, if approved, should only be carried out by an appropriately certified welder; 

  No modifications should be made which bypass or override any safety device under any circumstance. 

2  Fatality – Fall from Height Arising from a Failure to Use Personal Protective Equipment 

Keywords:  Fall 

We have received the following incident report, involving a fall from height from an offshore platform. 

A  contractor  was  working  on  the  skimmer  level  of  an  offshore  platform,  approximately  10½  metres  above  the  water,  to 
wrap a light fixture in preparation for sandblasting operations. 

He had been told by his supervisor in their safety meeting to use a ‘spider’ (a lifting device), safety harness and work vest to 
get to the fixture, as it extended outward from the walkway.  However, the contractor chose to lean out from the walkway 
and through the handrails, instead of using his PPE. 

While  attempting  to  wrap  plastic  around  the  light,  the  fixture  broke  off  of  its  pedestal  and  the  contractor,  who  had  the 
majority of his weight shifted outward, fell, striking his head on the way down and entering the water unconscious.  He was 
retrieved from the water, but never regained consciousness. 

The  company  involved  has  reiterated  the  importance  of  never  taking  shortcuts    and  the  need  for  job  safety  analyses  and 
understanding of all of the potential hazards.  It has circulated information on this incident to be included in all of its safety 
meetings  and  site  orientations,  to  underline  the  consequences  of  taking  shortcuts.    It  is  also  reviewing  the  fall  protection 
section of its relevant handbook. 

3  Diver Fatality – Underwater Explosion 

Keywords:  Explosion 

A  member  has  advised  of  a  recent  fatality,  involving  an  experienced  diver,  which  occurred  during  underwater  cutting 
operations  as  part  of  a  well  stub  removal  project.    The  site  conditions  and  sequence  of  events  are  summarised  in  the 
diagrams below. 

CORROSION CAP 

-188 msw 

 

 

 

GROUT RETURN HOLE 
SEEPING BUBBLES 

Ø 30" CASING 

Ø 20" CASING 

see following 
picture for detail 
 

VETCO SG-5 
18  " 3-HANGER HOUSING 

30" HOUSING ASSEMBLY 

NOTE: 
LOCATED STUB 
@ 17:00, DAY 1 

MUDLINE -191 msw 

LOCAL SCOURING AROUND 
WELLHEAD 

 

 

ORIGINAL MUDLINE BEFORE JETTING 

DAY 4 12:32 WINDOW CUT OUT 1½  x 3½

-198 msw 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The company’s subsequent investigation has noted the following findings: 

  Site  conditions  had  proved  to  be  different  from  those  represented  in  the  end-customer’s  drawing,  in  terms  of  the 

wellhead connector assembly, bubbling gas and lack of grout between annuli; 

  Generic procedures had been produced for what had been considered a ‘standard’ or ‘routine’ well stub removal; 

  The job safety analysis (JSA) had focused on excavation as the primary risk; 

  A ‘can do/will do’ attitude can be prevalent among dive teams and in the wider industry, which may have caused some 

resistance to halt operations; 

  The project manager only had limited involvement in this operation; 

  The on-site procedure, developed by a widely experienced team of diving superintendent, supervisor and diver, proved 

to be not adequate to avoid the fatality. 

The company has noted the following actions: 

It has instigated a ‘formal request for information’ procedure for retrieval of additional information from customers; 

It has reiterated that salvage and burning jobs are never routine and are potentially hazardous.  It has noted the need for 
detailed procedures and project risk assessments to be prepared, as per its project management procedures; 

It has noted the need for project management procedures to include formal job handover procedures and project risk 
assessments; 

It has pointed out the need for formal project risk assessments and work site job safety analyses (JSAs) to identify all 
potential risks before commencement of operations; 

It is aiming for a better implementation of its ‘safety stand-down’ system through reinforcement training, in accordance 
with its management-of-change procedures, to bring about a ‘can do/will do safely’ culture embraced by all employees; 

  Again  in  relation  to  a  better  implementation  of  its  management-of-change  procedures,  the  company  has  noted  that, 
whenever  appropriate,  project  managers,  senior  and/or  onshore  management  and  the  customer  are  to  be  involved  in 
and to approve all significant changes to procedures. 

4 

Incident Involving a Crane Boom 

Keywords:  Crane 

We have received a report of an incident whereby a crane boom fell from an angle of 45° onto its rest.  There was no one in 
the crane at the time of the incident, but one person on the main deck was slightly hurt by the debris as the crane boom fell.  
The crane suffered significant damage to the boom, luffing winch, brake and hydraulic motor and the potential for serious 
injury is obvious. 

No root cause has so far been identified and an investigation is still ongoing.  Initial investigations suggest that, although the 
crane was left parked in a properly parked mode, both winch drum brakes and the safety pawl all stayed off or partially off 
when the crane was de-energised, when they should all have engaged.  Three co-incidental failures seem extremely unusual 
and investigations are currently centred on whether the hydraulic system could have somehow locked pressure in to keep all 
the brakes off. 

