AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/11 

Safety Flash 

 October 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Offshore Tank Container Rigging Failure 

A member has reported two incidents in which the rigging of an offshore tank container failed as a result of a cold fracture.  
In  both  cases  a  tank  container  was  rearranged  on  deck  and  damage  was  observed  prior  to  actually  lifting  the  container.  
There was no other damage than to the link itself. 

An approved offshore container is outfitted with an associated rigging set that stays attached for handling.  The container and 
sling are re-certified on an annual basis.  For both sets of failed rigging the certification was found to be in order. 

  Both containers were lifted in static conditions (deck to deck) in good weather conditions; 

  Both containers were full at the time of lifting and the weight of the container did not exceed the safe working load; 

  There was no deformation in the link or chain observed in either case; they were so-called cold fractures; 

 

In both cases it was the master link in a corner fitting of the container that failed. 

Following the first incident, the chain link was sent to a laboratory to establish the cause of the failure.  It was, at the time, 
concluded that the most likely scenario that caused the fast sudden fracture was a forging defect in the master link. 

Following the second incident some seven months later, the similarities between the two incidents were apparent and it was 
established that both rigging  sets were purchased from a single batch.   With reference to similar incidents in the industry, 
hydrogen induced cracking or manufacturing process errors could not be ruled out.  As this failure mechanism could not be 
determined by non-destructive examination methods, it was decided to replace all rigging sets from this batch (32 of) with 
new rigging sets. 

Laboratory results are awaited on these quarantined rigging sets and the broken link for further action as appropriate. 

 

 

Failed chain link 

 

 

 
2  Near Miss: Dropped Object: 6kg Sledge Hammer Head 

A member has reported an incident in which a 6kg hammer head fell 5m (metre) to an unmanned deck.  Whilst using the 
sledge hammer to dislodge a 600Te shackle connecting a 340Te wire, the hammer head came free of the wooden shaft when 
it was struck against the shackle pin, and it fell 5m to the unmanned area below which had no barriers in place.  There were 
no injuries. 

On closer inspection, it was noted that there were a number of small indentations around the head and along the shaft, two 
hairline cracks at the head end of the hammer and a large open split at the user end of the handle. It was also noted that the 
lanyard used to secure the handle was an inadequate solution for the retention of tools used at height. 

Closer inspection of handle and hammer head 

 

Following  investigation,  it  was  identified  that  there  had  been  numerous  other  occasions  where  hammer  heads  had  either 
been found loose or had come off during use.  In addition, several cases reported damaged shafts. 

The following lessons were learnt: 

location; 

  The inspection for damage of all hand tools should always be carried out prior to use and before returning to storage 

  Hammer heads should be checked for security prior to use, ensuring heads are securely fixed to handle; 

  Defective tooling should be removed from service and quarantined; 

  Appropriate  tool  retention  methods  should  be  used  when  working  at  height  with  tools;  different  methods  may  be 

appropriate for tools of different weight; 

  The tool lanyard connection point should either be supplied with the hammer, recommended by the tool manufacturer 

or be a recommended and approved lanyard manufacturer’s modification. 

 

 

Some suggested tool lanyard arrangements 

  

 
3  Near Miss: Crane Winch Wire Damaged Crane Cab During Heavy Seas 

A member has reported an incident in which, owing to the sudden movement of the vessel, a crane winch wire hit the crane 
cab  with  the  operator  inside,  causing  damage  to  the  cab  structure.    The  operator  was  unharmed.    The  incident  occurred 
after completing the wet storing of a spool using the single fall main block.  The crane boom, complete with suspended spool 
lift rigging, was recovered to the main deck.  Whilst the block was over the deck, the vessel pitched and rolled heavily thus 
causing the crane block to swing adversely.   The crane operator attempted to recover the situation.  As he attempted to 
recover  the  block,  the wire  immediately  above  the  block hit  the  crane  cab  damaging  the  cab  structure  and  breaking  glass.  
The impact showered the crane operator with glass. 

This routine operation had the potential to be a fatality.  There was no designated landing area for which to land the crane 
block and its attached rigging safely.  This had been considered a routine operation yet the risks had not been fully captured 
during the planning stage. 

Crane cab showing damage 

Landing area seen from above (circled) 

 

 

Crane block 

 

Subsequent to an investigation, the following were noted: 

  The landing area on the aft deck for the block and rigging was very restricted due to a tall subsea structure being in the 

same area; 

  The  crane  boom  position  had  to  be  at  a  12m  radius  and  the  block  had  to  be  lifted  high  in  order  for  the  block  and 

attached rigging to be lifted over the subsea structure.  This position left the block at the same height as the crane cab. 

 
The following recommendations were made: 

Arrangement (GA) drawings; 

  A safe landing area on the main deck should be identified and clearly marked both on the deck itself and on the General 

 

If it becomes necessary to use this area, a specific risk assessment should be required and an alternative, temporary safe 
landing area identified; 

  Lift  planning  should  cover  crane  operations  from  start  to  finish,  including  the  initial  movement  of  the  crane  and  also 

recovery of rigging to deck. 

4  Near Miss: Diver Working Under Suspended Load 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver found himself working under a suspended load. 

Whilst  conducting  diving  operations  around  a  subsea  manifold,  a  subsea  work  basket  weighing  375kg  in  water  was  landed 
without proper warning very close to a diver standing on the subsea manifold.  Tools and equipment were being deployed to 
the divers using a cherry picker crane without heave compensation.   Part of the lift planning was a ‘short mark’ established 
prior  to  subsea  deployment  of  the  load.    The  length  of  winch  wire  deployed  was  then  closely  monitored  on  the  crane 
line out meter to ensure that loads were stopped at a safe distance from the divers working on the seabed.  Additionally, the 
crane wire had a transponder attached which allowed the depth to be monitored by the dive control department.  Once the 
load was at the required short mark it was standard practice to have the  remotely operated vehicle (ROV), in conjunction 
with a diver, spot the load and then monitor the final stage of the deployment to the seabed. 

Dive control had requested that tools and equipment be deployed using a 1m x 1m work basket.  The basket was prepared 
with a beacon, strobe and light sticks attached to help improve its visibility subsea.  On previous dives the short mark had 
been set at 95m with a working depth of 108m but, as the divers were having difficulty seeing the loads due to poor visibility, 
the short mark was altered to 100m to allow the load closer and make it easier to spot.  The work basket was deployed and 
the line out meter zeroed at the splash zone to ensure the load could be stopped at the required mark. 

Dive control requested that diver 1 make his way to the top of the manifold to prepare for the basket being landed.  When 
he arrived at the manifold he could not see the load and was told it was on its way down.  While he was waiting for the load 
to arrive he started to inspect the landing zone to ensure it was clear to land the work basket.    As he was  doing  so, the 
deployed work basket suddenly landed behind him on top of the manifold. 

Diver 1 called an immediate ‘all stop!’ and at the same time the crane driver informed dive control that as per his line out 
meter he had reached the required short mark.  During this operation the ROV had not been requested to spot the load at 
any point during the deployment. 

 

 

Typical 1m x 1m work basket for deployment subsea 

An investigation was conducted, noting the following: 

  There was no written and agreed procedure for this operation with lifts being completed using usual practice; 

  There had been no risk assessment for deploying subsea loads from the crane; 

  There was no lift plan in place for the work basket and hence no discussion of the work basket during toolbox talks, 

which might have highlighted potential hazards and considerations for personnel involved; 

 
  Though trained in using the picker crane, the crew using it may not have been fully aware that movement of the boom 

and knuckle could result in the load being at a different position with no change on the line out meter reading; 

  The crane crew may not have closely monitored the reading from the transponder and instead used the line out meter 

reading as the primary source of monitoring the depth of the load; 

  Several previous faults had been reported on the crane line out meter with the meter returning to zero during subsea 

operations; these reports had been investigated but no permanent fault had been identified; 

  Diver 1 should have been informed to inspect the landing zone for the work basket prior to the load being deployed 
overboard and then instructed to move out of the landing zone until the load had reached the short mark and was being 
monitored  by  dive  control  using  the  ROV.    In  this  way,  he  would  have  been  protected  from  working  underneath  a 
suspended load. 

The following actions were taken: 

  Develop and circulate vessel-specific procedures for deployment of loads with picker cranes or winches, including safe 

over-boarding areas, communication protocols and illustration of roles and responsibilities of departments; 

  Develop  specific  lift  plans  for  all  working  baskets  and  equipment  in  use  subsea,  including  reference  to  any  job  risk 

assessment (JRA) where divers or ROVs are present subsea; 

  Ensure all personnel operating picker cranes or winches have completed a suitable level of competency training for that 

piece of equipment. 

5  Fast Rescue Boat Dropped 18m Into Sea – Injuring Crew 

The Australian Transport Safety Board (ASTB) has published a report into a fast rescue boat incident on board a natural gas 
tanker.  The incident occurred in 2010.  A crew member was medically evacuated using the ship’s fast rescue boat for the 
transfer.  The crew of the fast rescue boat and the person being evacuated were injured when, during the launch, the ship’s 
fast rescue boat dropped 18m and impacted the water below. 

Further information can be found at www.atsb.gov.au/media/2494088/mo2010004.pdf 

6  Dynamic Positioning (DP) System Failure 

IMCA has received information from a member about an incident involving the DP system aboard one of its vessels.  Because 
of the resulting inherent failure possibility, the company has identified the need to modify the software installed in  the DP 
systems on several vessels within  its fleet.   The DP manufacturer has issued a technical bulletin relating to this  (attached).  
It is  felt  that  the  serious  nature  of  this  incident  made  it  important  to  share  this  information  as  a  safety  flash  and  also  as 
information note IMCA M 19/11 – Dynamic positioning system failure. 

7  Engine Room CO2 Isolating Valve 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published Safety Flash 11-31 (attached) regarding a routine inspection of a vessel’s CO2 
fire fighting system. It was noticed that the engine room CO2 isolating valve remained in the closed position when the valve 
handle was manually operated. 

Further information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.31.pdf 

8  Engine Room Fire on Offshore Vessel 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  Safety  Flash  11-32  (attached)  regarding  a  fire  reported  in  the  main  engine 
room of an offshore support vessel which was under tow at the time.  The source of the fire was identified as being fuel oil 
leaking from the flange on a fuel injector pump onto an engine. 

Further information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.32.pdf 

 

  

 
Technical Bulletin No DP-03/2011  
Technical Bulletin
Kongsberg September 20 2011 
 

7.0.9. 

dual redundant 

a Kongsberg Maritime  

” reported) that prevented it to become online. 

and distributed to clients having a Kongsberg Maritime

system with the software versions in the range 7.0.0 - 7.0.9

made to DP operators manual, Chapter 7.2 “Redundant systems”.
. 

incident has been reported where the master computer stopped on a dual 

sequence of events made the slave computer enter into a temporary error 
a temporary error 

nvestigation has revealed that the master computer stopped due to a hardware 
due to a hardware 

This bulletin is relevant for, and 
redundant K-Pos system with the software versions 
_____________________________________________
_____________________________________________
_____________________________________________ 
 
K-Pos –master/slave automatic switchover incident
master/slave automatic switchover incident
master/slave automatic switchover incident 
 
Description and background
ackground 
An incident has been reported where the
K-Pos system and the switchover was not performed as expected.
Pos system and the switchover was not performed as expected. 
 
The investigation has revealed that
failure. The sequence of events made the
state (alarm “PS Incapable” reported
 
The existing procedure is to manually unlock the error state
The existing procedure is to manually unlock the error state. 
Reference made to DP operators manual, Chapter 7.2 
 
 
Permanent solution 
A solution has been developed to automa
when the error no longer is present.  
when the error no longer is present.   
This software update must be installed
This software update must be installed and tested by a Kongsberg Maritime 
representative.  
The update will be performed on a first come first serve basis
software update will be covered under KM standard warranty conditions.
will be covered under KM standard warranty conditions. 
 
  
For further information please contact Kongsber
For further information please contact Kongsberg Maritime, Customer Support
 
Tel: 
 
E-mail:  
 
 
 
Yours faithfully, 
Jørn Mastervik 
 
 
 
 
General Manager,   
Global Customer Support Offshore
Global Customer Support Offshore 
KONGSBERG MARITIME AS 

          + 47 815 35 355
+ 47 815 35 355 
km.support.dp@kongsberg.com
km.support.dp@kongsberg.com 
 

to automatically unlock the error state (PS Incapable)
tically unlock the error state (PS Incapable) 

on a first come first serve basis, and the cost of the 
cost of the 

g Maritime, Customer Support: 

 

 

 

 
 

Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 11-31 
Issued:  23rd August 2011 

 

Subject: Engine Room CO2 Isolating Valve 
 
During routine inspection of a vessel’s CO2 fire fighting system it was noticed that the engine room 
CO2 isolating valve remained in the closed position when the valve handle was manually operated. 
This was evident by the position of the valve spindle which remained in the closed position whilst 
the handle showed that the valve was open.  
 

        

 

Spindle remained in the closed position 
whilst the handle was in the open 
position. 

 
 
 
The isolating valve was removed, freed up and the handle was repaired and tightened. During this 
repair process the safety pins for the CO2 bottles were put in place and removed once the repair 
was completed. 
 
In the  event  of  a fire and  the  need for  CO2 flooding, the  isolating  valve  handle would  have been 
forced to the open position, whilst the valve itself would have remained shut, thereby disabling CO2 
flooding. 
 
All  vessels  must  ensure  that  these  CO2  isolating  valves  open  and  that  it  is  not  just  the  handles 
turning on the valve spindles. All vessels are instructed to add a line of instruction to the TM job for 
checking that this valve is operating correctly when the inspection is done on the CO2 system. 

. 

 

- 1 - 

 

 

    

 

 
 

Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 11-32 
Issued:  23rd August 2011 

 

Subject: FIRE IN ENGINE ROOM OF OFFSHORE SUPPORT VESSEL 
 
An  Offshore  Support  Vessel  was  being  towed  astern  of  a  rig  during  a  rig  move  transit  operation 
when  a  fire  was  reported  from  the  main  engine  room  of  the  vessel.  The  engine  room  fire 
suppression  system  (Hi-Fog  Water  Mist)  was  automatically  activated,  emergency  fuel  shut-off 
valves  closed  to  shut  off  fuel  supply  to  the  affected  engine  and  vessel  emergency  response 
procedures  initiated.  The  fire  was  effectively  extinguished  within  10  minutes  by  the  vessel’s 
Emergency  Response  Team  (ERT)  personnel  using  portable  extinguishers.  Following  checks  on 
the  main  engine(s)  and  safety  equipment,  vessel  was  able  to  continue  operations  safely  with 
remaining 3 engines.  
The source of the fire was subsequently identified as due to fuel oil leaking from the flange on a 
Fuel Injector Pump on main engine No.2. The fuel return line had come loose at the flange due to 
one  of  two  securing  bolts  shearing  and  the  other  working  loose.  Fuel  sprayed  from  the  leaking 
flange and impinged upon the adjacent hot lagging of the main engine exhaust and turbo charger 
resulting in ignition and subsequent fire.  
 
•  Return  Fuel  line  on  the  injector  pump for  main  engine  No.2  had  come  loose  at  the  connection 
flange resulting in fuel spray to leak and impinge hot lagging on adjacent exhaust and turbocharger 
lagging. This subsequently resulted in ignition and fire  
• The flange for the Fuel Injector Pump had only 2 securing bolts. One of which had sheared off 
and the other had worked loose which led to the fuel leak  
•  The  Fuel  Injector  Pump  was  serviced  every  15,000  running  hours  as  per  PMS.  However  no 
guidelines  were  available  from  the  main  engine  manufacturer-MAK-on  specific  checks,  torqueing 
requirements and replacement programme for the securing bolts  
 
LESSONS LEARNED  
•  Upon  checking  on  other  vessels  in  the  fleet  following  the  incident,  vessel  operator  discovered 
loose flange securing bolts on similar main engine configuration and fuel lines with a potential for 
failure and loss of containment  
• Current design of the flange securing bolts (2 bolts instead of 4) was not ideal in ensuring that the 
integrity of the flange connection was maintained  
•  For  safety  critical  connections  bolt  torqueing  guidelines  should  be  communicated  by  the 
manufacturer and enforced / monitored as part of the periodic preventative maintenance system for 
the asset  
• Importance of maintaining and testing emergency fire fighting systems and ERT training through 
regular emergency drills on board vessels  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
• Include 3 monthly checks on fuel line flange bolts into contractor’s Planned Maintenance System 
(PMS). This to include physical checks on the torque and condition of the fuel flange bolts as per 
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) guidelines.  
•  Request  information  from  engine  manufacturer  (MAK)  on  bolt  composition  and  torqueing 
requirements  on  securing  bolts  for  the  Fuel  Injector  Pump.  Information  to  be  disseminated  to 
vessel operators and marine community via subsequent Information/Safety Flash  

 

- 1 - 

 

 

   •  Vessel  operators  to  initiate  checks  on  similar  fittings  on  Fuel  Injector  Pumps  and  other  high 
pressure pumps to check on condition and integrity of securing bolts. Checks and monitoring are 
especially  critical  after maintenance  and reinstatement  of  high pressure  lines  to check for  steady 
state operation  
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

- 2 - 

 

 

