AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/08 

Safety Flash

September 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Serious Injury Incident During Routine Crane Maintenance 

A  member  has  reported  a  serious  injury  incident  which  took  place  recently  during  planned  routine  crane  maintenance 
operations onboard a third party vessel. 

Access to the crane cab level was via a stairway from the main deck, leading to a vertical ladder which then gave access to 
the  upper  crane  platform.    At  the  time  of  the  incident,  routine  planned  maintenance  was  being  carried  out  on  the  crane 
winch pumps on the upper crane cab level, as shown below: 

 

 

The Incident 

Lessons Learnt 

A crew member was carrying out routine maintenance on the upper crane platform, checking gearbox and pump oil levels, of 
which there were twelve to be checked.  The oil check involved manually removing a plug.  The crew member’s gloves and 
boot soles became contaminated with hydraulic oil and, when descending the vertical ladder, the crew member slipped on 
the ladder rungs and fell approximately two metres to the crane cab platform below.  During the fall the crew member’s left 
leg became trapped in one of the lower rungs, causing injury. 

Following  immediate  assistance  from  the  onboard  medic  and  consultation  with  medical  advisers,  the  crew  member  was 
medevaced ashore.  It was later confirmed that the person had suffered a fracture of the left tibia. 

Working on the upper crane platform was  considered to be a routine activity and consequently there were no permit to 
work (PTW) or other working at height (WAH) controls in place. 

There were no task procedures in place for the activity and the method of checking the oil levels by removing a plug to bleed 
the oil was deemed to be unacceptable.  Hazards and controls were not properly identified. 

The task was seen purely as ‘routine’ maintenance and there was an unchallenged acceptance of the method of carrying it 
out. 

Perception and awareness of the potential risk involved in this task was low.  There was: 

  no risk assessment in place; 

  no toolbox talk held prior to the job; 

 

lack of active supervision. 

A ladder access survey did not fully recognise the potential risks around safe access/egress from the upper crane platform.  
The design of the vertical ladder and its location/position was considered to be inadequate and unsuitable: 

‘Backscratcher’ was considered to be ineffective and did not provide adequate fall protection; 

there was no suitable handrail fitted; 

there was no anti-slip to the ladder rungs; 

the ladder’s position relative to the upper crane platform meant that it was only possible to step on to it in a ‘backwards‘ 
position. 

 

 

 

 

 

Actions 

This  incident  clearly  had  the  potential  for  much  more  serious  consequences  and  was  classified  as  a  HIPO  (high  potential 
event).    The  investigation  revealed  a  number  of  key  learning  points  which  should  be  shared  by  IMCA  members  to  raise 
awareness and help eliminate any similar incidents in the future. 

  Routine planned maintenance activities should be reviewed to assess if there are any similar ones which may fall under 

the WAH category and should include a PTW; 

  Risk assessments should be in place and be reviewed for routine tasks; 

  Vessel supervisory staff should actively involve themselves in toolbox talks for marine routine activities and ensure that, 

where appropriate, they are recorded; 

  The design and location/position of the existing ladders should be reviewed to ensure/improve safe access/egress. 

2  Failure of Fall Arresters 

A member has reported several incidents onboard vessels where fall arresters have been found to be defective.  Although 
the incidents have not resulted in any injuries to personnel they may have had very serious consequences. 

It is believed that the failure of the equipment was lack of inspection and/or maintenance.  It is of utmost importance that 
appropriate  maintenance  and  inspection  of  fall  arrest  equipment  is  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer’s 
instructions. 

Members  are  recommended  to  remind  vessel  crews  to  go  through  the  inspection  and  maintenance  regime  to  ensure  fall 
arrest equipment is maintained to a safe standard. 

Below are pictures from one of the failed equipment: 

 

 

