AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/99 

December 1999 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Hydraulic hand pump (enerpac) hose failure 

A member has reported that while extending an hydraulic arm on a tooling system using a (enerpac) hydraulic pump, rated 
for 10,000 psi (680 bar), the output hose burst next to the coupling at the end of the output hose.  On investigation, it was 
found  that  the  enerpac  output  hose  was  rated  for  3,000  psi  (200  bar)  and  had  been  damaged  (kinked)  prior  to  use.    In 
addition to this, the enerpac pressure gauge was facing away from the pump operator, resulting in the operator not knowing 
what pressure the enerpac was generating.  Fortunately in this case no injuries were sustained. 

The contractor involved has issued the following reminder to its personnel: 

  Equipment such as hydraulic hand pumps (enerpacs) and associated equipment should be visually inspected prior to use 

for damage, to ensure integrity and to ensure that pressure gauges, etc., are working correctly; 

  Always use a gauge to verify system pressure; 

  Be aware of the safe working pressure of all parts of the system - the output hoses may be rated at a lower pressure 

  Full personal protective equipment (PPE) including eye protection should be utilised by all personnel in the area, not only 

than other parts of the system; 

the system operator; 

  Risk assessments should be revisited. 

2  Condition of container doors 

One  of  our  members  has  reported  a  failure  of  a  container  door  on  one  of  their  vessels.    The  container  door  became 
unlatched during a period of moderate swell.  The vessel motion caused the door to swing and this, coupled with corrosion 
around the door hinge, resulted in the door falling to the deck.  Fortunately no-one was injured. The container had been in 
storage for six months. 

This incident highlights the potential hazards when entering and exiting containers of any type.   

The contractor involved has reminded its personnel to check all container door hinges as part of their regular maintenance 
schedule.    This  check  should  include  the  latching  system  and  the  area  around  the  actual  hinges  themselves  as  they  are 
exposed to both the environment and sea states. 

3  Crane accidents 

Two accidents have recently been reported during a lifting operation on a fixed installation. 

The first accident happened during the lifting of a 13 tonne tank.  When topping the boom to reach the right location to put 
the load on the deck, the boom suddenly started falling and the load fell down approximately three metres until it hit the top 
of  two  other  stored  tanks.    These  tanks  were  about  two  metres  apart  and  the  falling  tank  got  jammed  in  between  them.  
Fortunately no-one was hurt.  The crane boom descent stopped when the crane operator put the boom operating joystick in 
neutral position which automatically activated the boom brake. 

The second incident occurred half an hour later when it was attempted to lay the boom into its rest.  To do this, the crane 
driver had to slew the crane about 45°.  During this operation, the boom once again fell uncontrolled.  The boom hits its rest 
so hard that it bent the boom rest.  The connection bolts between boom sections 2 and 3 were sheared and the forward 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

part of the boom tipped down from the boom rest in a 90° angle.  Only the whip wire rope prevented the forward two 
sections falling into the sea. 

The immediate cause of the incident was found to be the collapse of the input gear (sun gear) between the main shaft from 
the hydraulic motor to the gearbox on the boom winch.  All teeth were broken off.  The most likely cause for this was the 
incorrect assembly of the sun gear. A washer had probably come out of position during installation and this has led to rapid 
wear of the sun wheel gear. 

The key lessons identified were: 

to  ensure  adequate  inspection  and  planned  maintenance  programmes  for  critical  systems/components  by  persons 
adequately trained; 

the  importance  of  clear  and  correct  procedures  and  descriptions  of  work  to  be  undertaken;  and  that  these  be 
understood and followed during disassembly and assembly of the gear box; 

 

the importance of the use of carrying out a safe job analysis before critical jobs and operations. 

4  Crane whip line incident 

We have recently learned of a crane whip line, on an offshore crane, parting when lifting a concrete mat weighing 4.5 tonnes 
from the vessel deck.  The load being lifted was well within the safe working load of the wire and the crane.  Fortunately no-
one was injured and no damage was sustained. 

After investigation it was concluded that the wire rope parted due to internal corrosion which had been generated from lack 
on internal lubrication of the first, approximately, 22m of the wire from the hook end.  This allowed corrosion of the internal 
strands  generating  a  fatigue  failure  of  the  internal  wire  and  a  tensile  failure  of  the  external  wire  which  resulted  in  a 
contribution  of  fatigue  and  loss  of  metallic  areas.    This  conclusion  was  further  substantiated  when  the  wire  was  visually 
inspected  at  the  contractor’s  premises,  where  it  was  found  that  the  first  16m  was  heavily  corroded  with  its  condition 
gradually improving to the 22m mark. 

There had been inspection, greasing and destruct tests of the wire rope during its service.  A 100% NDT inspection and high 
pressure lubrication of the wire had been undertaken a couple of months prior to the incident.  It was subsequently found 
that, although the wire should have had a 100% inspection, NDT and high pressure lubrication, this was not achieved.  When 
the wire rope was reeled off the crane onto a reel sited on the quayside and the NDT and pressure lubricating equipment 
positioned on the crane jib approximately 25m of the wire was omitted from the inspection.  This was the section of wire 
that failed. 

The company involved has contacted the inspection company to verify that it has changed its quality procedures to include a 
method statement to ensure 100% NDT inspection and high-pressure lubrication. 

The  planned  maintenance  for  the  inspection  of  vessel  crane  wires  is  to  be  reviewed  to  determine  if  the  frequency  and 
mechanism is sufficient to actively monitor the condition of crane wire ropes in use. 

5  Forged diving certificates 

We have recently learned of irregularities coming to light on a project whose scope included a small inshore diving element. 

On audit, the diving company was discovered to have a number of certification inconsistencies including forged HSE diving 
certificates and medicals.  The diving contractor involved had been operating in the area for the past two years. 

This highlights the importance of having in place audit programmes for sub-contractor companies and their personnel. 

