Safety Flash 

 March 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Fire Safety 

Here are four recent incidents all involving fire or the risk of fire.  The first involves an actual galley fire which was 
extinguished by automatic equipment.  Lack of knowledge, inadequate maintenance and work standards and lack 
of skill and poor practice were amongst the root causes identified. 

The next two incidents deal with near misses where equipment failure caused smoke or a small fire.  In both cases 
the presence of smoke triggered automatic smoke detection systems, causing a General Alarm.  The prompt and 
professional response of the vessel crew ensured that neither incident got out of control.  The second of these 
incidents was caused by fuel impacting on hot metal. 

The final near miss, in which during a drill the vessel bridge was found to have no control of the emergency fire 
pump, could have led to a serious issue in the event of a real fire. 

Members may wish to reiterate the importance of taking fire drills seriously.  Another interesting question emerging 
from one of these incidents is, how do we manage a real emergency that starts during a drill? 

1 

Fire in the Deep Fat Fryer 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a 
fire in a deep fat fryer.  The galley crew were finished in the 
galley  and  went  for  a  break  at  12:55.    At  13:02  the  fire 
alarm  sounded,  indicating  a  fire  in  the  galley.    Crew 
mustered and power was switched off to the galley.  Fire 
teams  were  prepared.    On  entry  into  the  galley  it  was 
discovered that the deep fat fryer was the cause of the fire, 
and  that  the  automatic  fire  prevention  system  over  the 
deep fat fryer had extinguished the blaze.  There were no 
injuries.  Some smoke got into the accommodation spaces 
but was ventilated out. 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The galley crew said that the deep fat fryer was turned 

off 10 minutes before they left the galley; 

  The  deep  fat  fryer  had  a  thermostat  with  maximum 
210°C, and thermal fuses which should have cut out, 
with  an  alarm  sounding,  at  246°C  and  275°C.    These 
two thermal fuses had not cut out; 

 

 

 
  No fault was found with the thermostat after the fire.  It could not be said with certainty that the thermostat 

was without fault – an intermittent fault could have been present; 

  The oil used in the deep fat fryer had a flash point of ~250°C, but the user manual for the device requires that 

the oil used should have a flash point higher than 350°C; 

  The most likely cause of the fire was the high oil temperature; 

  The deep fat fryer was left in an unsafe condition: 

  The two baskets were not removed 
  The lid was not in use 
  The  heating  element  was  not  clean,  and  the  thermostat  is  under  the  heating  element.    Therefore,  the 

thermostat could have been reading an incorrect temperature; 

  Two days before the incident, the deep fat fryer had been inspected and repaired by the engineers, but no work 

order or record was made of the corrective work or repair. 

Our member’s investigation recorded the following direct causes: 

 

Incorrect use of equipment/machinery: 
  The flash point of the oil used was too low 
  The deep fat fryer was left in an unsafe condition; 

 

Inadequate tools and equipment: the thermostat may have had an intermittent fault; 

  Our member’s investigation recorded the following root causes: 

  Lack of knowledge and lack of experience of what kind of oil should have been used in the deep fat fryer 
 

Inadequate maintenance standards – no proper records were kept after repair work was conducted on the 
fryer 

  Lack of skill/poor practice: the galley crew ought not have left the fryer in that condition 
 

Inadequate work standards: procedures were not adequate for the correct use and cleaning of the fryer. 

The deep fat fryer was taken out of use and an investigation begun.  The actions taken included: 

  Ensure oil with the correct flash point is used in all such fryers on all company vessels; 

  Ensure that all repair work is properly documented in company planned maintenance system; 

  Make sure focus/attention is given to ensuring galley equipment is left in safe and appropriate condition after 

use, and that there are proper procedures for cleaning the fryer. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

IMCA SF 07/11 Incident 2 Galley fryer fire 

2  Near Miss: Fire Hazard arising from Failed Fuel Pipe Connection 

A member has reported a near miss incident involving a failed fuel pipe connection.  The incident occurred while 
the vessel was full ahead in transit.  Smoke was observed near the port main engine.  Shortly thereafter, the smoke 
detection system activated, indicating smoke in the engine room, and the General Alarm sounded.  All personnel 
mustered at their “At Sea” emergency muster stations and fire parties were prepared.  The port engine was brought 
to a controlled stop and its fuel supply was isolated. 

The engineers identified that a fuel pipe connection had failed, and reported to the bridge that although there was 
slight smoke present in the engine room, there was no fire and the situation was under control. 

Repairs were made, the engine run up and tested satisfactorily, and the transit continued. 

 

 

 

 

 

Top view of the failed pipe in place 

Location of failure at the fuel pipe coupling 

 

 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The cause of the incident was a failed high pressure fuel pipe coupling between the fuel injector and delivery 

pipe.  This caused fuel to run onto hot engine components which created smoke. 
  The  leak  originated  from  the  fuel  coupling  which  contained  an  O-ring  seal  inside.    Upon  inspection  the 

O-ring was not brittle or damaged 

  The pipe was inspected and showed no signs of visible damage.  Further analysis would take place; 

  What went well: 

  “Know your ship” – the on-watch engineer had good awareness and knowledge of the engine room and 

was able to swiftly and correctly identify the failed component and source of potential fire 

  There was swift and safe co-ordination between engine room and bridge to safely stop the port engine and 

isolate the fuel supply 

  The crew muster was swift and effective 
  Repair and return to operation was conducted in less than two hours after initial emergency 
  Using OEM parts, and not suspect/reconditioned parts, allowed the vessel to implement repairs quickly and 

effectively; 

  What could have gone better: 

  The on-watch engineer, rather than immediately contacting the bridge and starting shut-down of the port 

engine, called the second engineer 

  Trends of failures – the vessel had noticed a trend developing with the failure of fuel supply piping – this 

was the third failure within four months. 

Our member took the following actions: 

 

Investigate similar systems to ensure no other latent failures or defects that may result in recurrence; 

  Ensure main engine fuel pump overhaul to include fuel pipe pressure testing and seal renewals. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

IMCA SF 10/14 which consists solely of fires in engine room spaces; 

IMCA SF 08/15 Incident 4 Fatalities: Engine Room Fire Caused by Fuel Spray Ignition [having the exact same 
immediate cause of fuel supply lines leaking onto hot metal]. 

 
3  Near Miss: Fire Hazard from Engine Room Equipment Failure 

A  member  has  reported  a  near  miss  incident  relating  to  a  fire  hazard  in  a 
separator room.  During routine planned maintenance and testing of a main 
engine  lube  oil  purifier  during  a  port  call,  smoke  was  noted  emerging  from 
beneath the guard of the purifier pre-heater. 

The  vessel’s  smoke  detection  system  activated,  indicating  smoke  in  the 
separator  room.    A  General  Alarm  was  sounded  and  a  broadcast  made  to 
inform the crew that a potential emergency was developing and “In Port” fire 
procedures were activated. 

The  heater  was  immediately  isolated  both  electrically  and  mechanically.  
Bridge was informed that although smoke was present there was no fire and 
the situation was under control.  The heater was monitored to ensure that it 
cooled appropriately and presented no further danger. 

Our member noted the following: 

  There was some initial confusion at the time of the alarm, for two reasons:  
  The  vessel  was  preparing  to  conduct  an  “At  Sea”  emergency  drill, 
which required personnel to muster on board, rather than ashore, and 
personnel assumed the drill had been brought forward 

  Communications were hampered by a fault with the vessel PA system.  The Master had to rely on portable 

UHF communications to clarify the exact situation. 

What caused the incident? 

heater casing, causing smoke; 

  The immediate cause was the overheating of the lube oil pre-heater, which in turn overheated the paint on the 

  The engineer carrying out the work noted his concerns with the operation of the heater.  He shut down the 

system by activating the heater stop button, and had the intent to report a possible fault; 

  Events overtook his intentions:  the smoke activated the smoke detection system and raised the General Alarm; 

  The root cause was discovered to be a failed switch in the safety cut-off mechanism, which was found to have 
failed in the “Reset” position; this meant that, even if the heater had tripped, it would have immediately reset 
itself thereby keeping the heater on. 

Positive points noted: 

  Concerns were identified and support was sought in a timely way; 

  When they heard the alarm, the duty engineer and chief engineer immediately activated both mechanical and 

electrical isolations, complete killing the system; 

  The vessel was brought to Emergency Stations relatively quickly, despite communications problems; 

 

Investigation correctly identified the failed component and chain of events that led to the hazard; 

  The  vessel  notified  shore  management  in  a  timely way  and  provided  full  supporting  information  about  the 

  Emergency communications – vessel management had notified shore management of the recurring defect with 

the PA system, but repairs had been deferred and then cancelled; 

  What happens when a real emergency occurs during a drill or exercise?  There was no policy or guidance in 

place to deal with this possibility. 

incident. 

Negative points noted: 

 

 
Particular actions taken: 

 

 

Investigation of similar systems to ensure no other latent failures or defects that may result in recurrence; 

Immediately  pursue  and  action  any  outstanding  defects  related  to  communications  and/or  emergency 
response systems; 

 

Implement and publish a procedure for emergencies occurring during drills and exercises. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

IMCA SF 14/11 Incident 5 Diver Helmet Hat Light [a dive helmet hat light which overheated to the point that 
the outer casing caught fire] 

4  Near Miss: Emergency Fire Pump could not be Started from the Bridge 

A  member  has  reported  a  near  miss  incident  in  which  it  was  discovered  that  an 
emergency fire pump could not be started from the bridge.  The discovery was made 
during  a  fire  drill  exercise  on  a  vessel.    The  Master  immediately  informed  the  chief 
engineer.  The chief engineer took action and noticed that the Emergency Fire pump 
main switch in the engine room was switched to local control.  He switched it from local 
control to bridge remote and informed the bridge to start again; on this attempt it was 
started successfully and came on line. 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  What went wrong? The vessel’s Emergency Fire pump main control switch in the engine 
control room was switched to “local control” instead of “remote/bridge control”. This 
meant that the Emergency Fire pump could not have been started from the bridge; 

  Stop  work  authority  (safety observation)  was  not  properly  used.   The  chief  engineer 
confirmed that when he had joined the vessel he had found the main switch on local 
control but did nothing to correct it; 

  Existing company procedures were not followed by the Master or the chief engineer, 
for monthly and weekly checks of this equipment. “Run the Emergency Fire pump on 
weekly  basis  and  ensure  that  it  is  capable  of  supplying  water  under  pressure  to  two 
charged fire hoses”.  This item was marked as completed; 

  There was a failure of communication: The fire drill scenario was particularly highlighted to the chief engineer, 
including the fact that during fire drill it would be required to start the Emergency Fire pump from the bridge.  
It was obviously understood but order and procedures were not followed. 

  Chief  engineer  to  ensure  that  the  main  switch  in  the  engine  room  is  always  stationed  on  “Bridge  Remote 
Control”.  A sign or notice to this effect to be posted in the engine room to remind engineers to always leave 
the switch on bridge remote control.  

  Ask questions, be willing to exercise the stop work authority; don’t assume it’s all just business as usual; 

  Drills and exercises exist for a reason – treat them seriously and guard against complacency; 

  Ensure that critical equipment checklists and tests are thoroughly carried out for real, not just ticked off; 

  Handovers at crew change and shift should be comprehensive and thorough, with a written record, and should 

cover all vital areas of concern. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: pump, switch) 

 

IMCA SF 04/14 Incident 2 Near Miss: Failure to Reconnect Fire Suppression Systems 

Action:  

Lessons learnt: 

 

