AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/11 

Safety Flash 

June 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Security of Equipment in Transit 

A member has reported an incident in which an ROV launch and recovery system (LARS) arrived offshore with parts missing.  
The  LARS  arrived  onboard  the  vessel  without  the  pin  connecting  the  left  side  (standing  on  the  LARS  looking  outboard) 
transport post to the A-frame.  

Following investigation, it was learnt that the A-Frame lift post pin was in place when the new LARS system left the supplier, 
but  was  not  in  place  when  it  arrived  at  our  member’s  storage  facility.    The  missing  pin  was  identified  during  routine 
inspection after the unit had been lifted and transported (twice), lifted and installed aboard the  vessel. For the pin to have 
been lost during transportation represents a high potential near miss for any vehicle (and passengers) who could have been 
struck by the pin falling from the moving transport vehicle.    

Our member, in co-operation with the supplier, took immediate steps to ensure prevention of future incidents. Additionally, 
our  member  is  in  the  process  of  designing  a  lift  post  pin  that  will  include  a  retaining  pin.  In  the  meantime,  members  are 
encouraged to conduct a careful inspection of all A-Frame lift post pins and verify that they are secure before equipment is 
lifted and transported. 

 Lift post pin installed. 

Lift post pin missing 

 

 

 

 

     Example of other lift post pin locking configuration 

  Example of future locking pin design with retaining pin 

 
2 

Improper Use of Tools: Bruising 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crewman  was  injured  whilst  using  a  power  tool  in  an  incorrect  manner.          
A crewman on night shift was required by the chief engineer to clean paint and corrosion off of the nuts on man-hole covers, 
so that the covers could be removed for inspection.  He was instructed to perform this task using either a hand-held wire 
brush or a 4 inch angle grinder fitted with a wire wheel.  These instructions were verbally acknowledged by the crewman, 
who had been employed on the vessel for nearly a year.  Nonetheless he decided to use a 5mm grinding disk on the angle 
grinder  instead  of  the  wire  wheel,  and  then  proceeded  to  cut  the  threads  off  the  bolts  on  the  man-hole  cover.    As  the 
grinding disk was being used in an incorrect manner, the disk jammed causing the grinder to deflect into his shoulder, cutting 
his boiler suit and causing bruising and a minor abrasion. 

  Inspection hatch being prepared  

 

 

     Broken grinding disk after inappropriate use 

 
 

 

 

An investigation noted the following: 

♦  Existing company procedures and clear instructions were not followed; 

♦  Risk assessments had not been completed; 

♦  The individual involved in the operation demonstrated a lack of safety awareness that put himself, his colleagues and the 

vessel at risk; 

♦  The individual involved in the operation had received no training in this specific task.  

The following lessons were learnt from the incident: 

♦  Complacency with regard to the use of power tools must be guarded against; 

♦  All persons involved in a task, from deck officers and supervisors to deck crew, should have a clear understanding of the 

nature of the task and their duties with regard to the task; 

♦  All  crew  should  have  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  requirement  for  risk  assessment  for  all  routine  and  non-routine 

tasks;   

♦  All crew members should be reminded of the importance of accepting personal responsibility for safety and that they all 

are empowered to stop work until safe operations are restored;  

♦  Shipboard training and familiarisation should include specific training in particular tasks and equipment. 

 

 

 

3  Lack of Safety Awareness: Crush Injury during Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman suffered minor crush injuries when his hand was caught between 
two objects during lifting operations.  The incident occurred when some oil drums were being positioned on the deck using 
the  crane,  with  the  assistance  of  two  deck  crew.    One  was  handling  the  tag  line  while  the  other  was  acting  as  the  lift 
supervisor and was equipped with a radio to communicate with the crane operator.  While manoeuvring the drums between 
a deck cargo of containers, the two deck crew attempted to man-handle the drums 1.5 meters horizontally without slewing 
the  crane  jib.    The  acting  lift  supervisor  was  pushing  on  the  drum  while  the  other  pulled  on  the  tag  line.    The  acting  lift 
supervisor radioed the crane operator and asked him to hoist a little; he was unaware at the time that the hoist wire was 
snagged on the container; this caused the drum to pinch the acting lift supervisor’s hand between the drum and container.  
He sustained a minor crush injury and was sent ashore for x-rays. 

Showing area where oil drums were being moved 

 

 

 The member’s investigation noted the following: 

♦  Existing company procedures were not followed; 

♦  Risk assessments had not been completed; 

♦  The individuals involved in the operation demonstrated a lack of safety awareness that put themselves, their colleagues 

and their vessel at risk; 

♦  The individuals involved in the operation had received no training in this specific task.  

The following lessons were learnt from the incident: 

♦  Complacency with regard to any lifting operation, however small, must be guarded against; 

♦  All persons involved in a task, from deck officers and supervisors to deck crew, should have a clear understanding of the 

nature of the task and their duties with regard to the task; 

♦  All  crew  should  have  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  requirement  for  risk  assessment  for  all  routine  and  non-routine 

♦  All crew members should be reminded of the importance of accepting personal responsibility for safety and that they all 

are empowered to stop work until safe operations are restored; 

♦  Shipboard training and familiarisation should include specific training in particular tasks and equipment. 

tasks;  

 

 
4  Anchor Handling Incident 

A member has reported an incident in which a buoy was damaged during anchor handling operations.  The incident occurred 
when recovering a buoy to deck; a lasso designed to catch a buoy cut through the buoy and damaged it beyond repair.  The 
incident occurred because the lasso was not deployed in a procedural and safe manner.  

Our member’s procedures state that the lasso should be thrown over the buoy and when tensioned, it should ‘choke’ onto 
the wire or chain underneath the buoy. If this procedure is not successful the buoy should be placed back in the water and 
the capture tried again until successful. 

Our member highlighted this as an example of how not following procedures can have a significant cost. 

        Buoy catcher lasso was not completely over the buoy 

 

 

Buoy is destroyed when lasso cuts through it 

  

 

 

 

 

 

5  Diver Safety – High Pressure Water Jetting Operations 

The  Australian  National  Offshore  Petroleum  Safety  Authority  (NOPSA)  has  recently  published  Safety  Alert  46  (attached) 
regarding diver safety during high pressure water jetting operations.  The alert highlights an incident where a diver sustained 
a  serious  injury  when  the  retro  diffuser  tube  became  detached  from  the  gun  allowing  the  full  force  of  the  retro  jet  to 
penetrate the diver’s arm. 

This information can also be found at http://www.nopsa.gov.au/alert/Alert46.pdf  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6  Failure of Fall Wire − Fatality 

The incident is summarised here: 

The UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) has published Safety Bulletin 1/11 (attached) regarding an overweight 
rescue boat causing the failure of a fall wire and subsequent fatality.     

During a routine drill conducted in sheltered waters, the fall wire attached to a rescue boat parted. The incident occurred at 
the point when the rescue boat had been hoisted to its stowed position. The rescue boat and its four crew fell nearly 29 
metres into the water below. One of the boat’s crew died and two were hospitalised. 

Further information can be found at www.maib.gov.uk/cms_resources/SB1-11.pdf. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

