AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/09 

Safety Flash 

June 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss – Dropped Clump Weight 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  clump  weight  was  inadvertently  dropped  to  the  seabed.    The  incident 
occurred during diving operations when operating a deck mounted tool deployment A-frame which incorporated two tugger 
winch systems and a downline powered sheave.  Each tugger winch wire had an 88kg clump weight attached.  One tugger 
was operational, deployed subsea with a downline secured to the wire at 10m intervals and the other inactive with the clump 
weight suspended just below the snatch block. 

While  recovering  the  tugger  wire  with  downline  to  the  surface,  it  was  noticed  that  the  winch  wire  clump  weight  could 
potentially foul the guard rails on the A-frame.  The decision was made to boom out the A-frame further.  As the A-frame 
was boomed out, the clump weight on the inactive wire rode up into the snatch block (because the tugger winch was not 
paid out as the boom was extended).  The winch wire parted and the clump weight dropped to the seabed.  

The clump weight landed on  a protection structure approximately 10m from the  divers who were working in  an adjacent 
manifold.  No one was injured and no equipment was damaged but there was a high potential for serious injury to the divers 
and for damage to subsea assets. 

A-frame with tugger winch, snatch block and powered sheave arrangement 

 

 

Position of deck crew during downline/tugger wire recovery 

 

Following investigation it was discovered that the following factors contributed to the high potential near miss: 

♦  The supervisor in charge of the operation on deck was himself operating the winch and A-frame rather than supervising 

‘hands off’; 

♦  The task risk assessment in place for the operation was not complete and did not cover all aspects of hazard and risk; 

♦  There was no limit switch or proximity device fitted to safeguard against collision; 

♦  The second tugger clump weight assembly was too close to the A-frame snatch block (when it should have been stowed 

with sufficient slack to take up any extension); 

♦  There  was  a  lack  of  awareness  regarding  the  position  of  the  second  tugger  winch  clump  weight  and  of  the  potential 

consequences of letting out the boom on the A-frame. 

The following corrective/preventative actions were taken: 

♦  Review  of  operating  procedures  and  risk  assessments  for  the  use  of  lifting  appliances  incorporating  independent 

hydraulic ram and winch controls, including: 
– 
– 

awareness of hook/load position when operating A-frame 
position  of  divers  –  exclusion  zone  for  divers  to  be  determined  from  dropped  object  analysis  and  this  should  be 
written into operating procedures and risk assessments 

–  warning notices to be posted on A-frames 
– 

deck crew to be familiarised and deemed competent to operate equipment; 

♦  Supervisors should be remain ‘hands off’ and in a position to monitor and control operations; 

♦  Operations requiring the over-boarding of anything when divers are in the water should require a dedicated toolbox talk 

to discuss and review over-boarding task risk assessment; 

♦  Full communication and agreement between the deck supervisor controlling the deck over boarding operation and the 

dive supervisor regarding: 
– 
– 

the imminent over-boarding of a load 
that divers are clear of the dropped object exclusion zone. 

2  Reintroduction of Personal Locator Beacons on Helicopter Flights 

Members’  attention  is  drawn  to  the  attached  announcement  from  Oil  &  Gas  UK  regarding  recent  developments  with 
personal  locator  beacons  (PLBs)  for  passengers  in  helicopters,  which  states  that  it  has  been  agreed  that  PLBs  should  be 
reintroduced on offshore helicopter flights from mid-July.  This follows an earlier announcement from the UK Civil Aviation 
Authority stopping the use of PLBs, which was covered in IMCA safety flash 05-09. 

 

 

3  Fall From Height 

A member has reported an incident in which a person was injured in a fall from a different level.  A saturation diver used the 
transfer under pressure (TUP) access hatch to come out of the saturation chamber while unloading equipment.  To re-enter 
the chamber the diver held on to the top dogging bar of the chamber.  The dogging bar rotated towards him causing him to 
lose his grip and fall approximately five feet on to the bell skid leading to muscle contusion and hairline fractures of his right 
forearm and right thigh. 

Further investigation revealed the following: 

♦ 

In normal circumstances the presence of the diving bell at this TUP access hatch made access and egress safe.  When the 
diving bell was removed, there was less edge protection around the platform; 

♦  The injured person did not recognise the lack of protection and increased risk of falling; 

♦  The injured person used an incorrect handle (dogging bar) to pull himself into the chamber. 

The following recommendations were made: 

♦  Reinforce the importance of management of change procedures; 

♦  Ensure the correct fixed handholds are used when accessing or exiting a saturation chamber; 

♦  Ensure all relevant personnel are aware of the location and use of the correct handholds; 

♦  Construct a removable platform with additional edge protection to facilitate access to and from the chamber when the 

bell is not present (see second picture). 

 
Grip used by diver when 
entering 
 

 
Temporary ladder used 
by divers – tied off to 
platform 
 

 
Base of diving bell rests 
on deck here and mated 
with flange here when 
not in use 
 

 
Fixed entrance 
platform ladder 
 

  

Saturation chamber from which diver fell 

SIDE VIEW 

 

Saturation main entrance 
 

Installed sliding extension platform with handle 
 

Removable handrail 
 

 

Movable platform to allow safe access to saturation chamber 

 

4  Sodasorb Burn Injury 

A member has reported that a diver has sustained a serious Sodasorb burn to his wrist. 

After investigation by the member, the following was found: 

♦  The spare bell scrubber basket had been filled with Sodasorb and sealed in a polythene bag which was in the bell for two 

days before it was used.  During this period it appears that seawater had entered the container; 

♦  When the diver lifted the basket, liquid ran out causing chemical burns to his wrist, the severity of which required that 

the diver be decompressed; 

♦  The polythene bag had either not been properly sealed or had been damaged. 

It is recommended that the polythene bag should be checked for seal and integrity before use, ensuring that it stays dry and 
that  dive  team  members  are  reminded  of  the  importance  of  safe  handling  practices  of  Sodasorb  and  other  diving  system 
chemicals. 

Oil & Gas UK E-Newsletter

If you can’t view this email, please click here

UK Oil and Gas Helicopter Task Group update
Reintroduction of PLBs on helicopter flights                                            3rd June 2009

 

Following a meeting on 2 June 2009 between the CAA, helicopter operators, the
health and safety executive and Oil & Gas UK, it has been agreed that personal
locator beacons should be reintroduced on offshore helicopter flights from mid
July. To find out more about the outcomes of the meeting, the background and the
technical challenges that will need to be overcome, please read on below.

 Background

Following the ditching of an offshore helicopter in the UK sector in February, investigations by the UK Air Accidents Investigation
Branch (AAIB) found that interference from the personal locator beacons – or PLBs – worn by passengers had effectively
switched off the “smart” long range rescue beacons that were fitted to the life rafts. This could have impacted the effectiveness of
the search and rescue operation.

The smart technology fitted to the life raft beacons is designed to shut the beacon down if it detects another beacon signal within
a certain radius. This is supposed to ensure that the aircraft can easily be homed in on by Search and Rescue (SAR) aircraft by
having only one high-powered aircraft beacon transmitting at a time. However, in the ETAP ditching, the lower powered
passenger PLBs (non-smart) were detected by the smart beacons, which caused all  of the aircraft and life raft beacons to power
down.

 

To find out more about the work
of the helicopter task group and
other important areas of work,
please click here

A short summary of the other
work fronts can be found below:

Flight following system

This new multilateration system enables
helicopter positions to be displayed to
the air traffic controllers on their radar
display without using radar.

Improvements to VHF voice
rebroadcasting

2009 will see the completion of a project
to revolutionise voice communication
with offshore helicopters.

Helideck lighting trials

As a result, the UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) instructed offshore helicopter operators within the UK to stop carrying personal
beacons in ‘stand by’ mode because of the risk of them being accidentally switched on, interfering with the aircraft’s safety
systems and shutting down its long-range beacons.

Trials for enhanced helideck lighting are
currently being carried out on
installations across the UKCS.

Following this instruction, it was agreed that the carriage of PLBs offshore would be temporarily halted until a solution to the
issue could be found. This was to ensure a consistent approach, and also because PLBs carried in the ‘off’ mode are difficult
(and for some models impossible) to activate whilst they are being worn.

Implementation of advanced
HUMS system

The beacons can still, however, be worn on board offshore platforms, especially for work being done over the side.  

Current position within the UK sector

The PLB Workgroup, established in March this year, has been working with the helicopter operators
and CAA to find a solution to these issues and have PLBs returned to use offshore as soon as
possible. This was identified as a priority by the Helicopter Task Group.
 
Following a series of discussions, a high level meeting was held on 2nd June 2009 between the
CAA, Health and Safety Executive (HSE), helicopter operators and Oil & Gas UK representatives to
agree a timeline for the reintroduction of PLBs. 

The group discussed the following issues: 

Accidental activation of PLBs – in order for the CAA and helicopter operators to accept the
reintroduction of PLBs, it must be demonstrated for each different type of PLB that they are
unlikely to go off accidentally (for example if dropped on the floor or tampered with during the
flight)

Smart beacon interference – To prevent the PLBs interfering with and shutting down the life
raft beacons (as happened in the ETAP ditching), the life raft beacons must be switched back
to a non-smart mode, so that they do not automatically switch off if they detect another

The industry is committed to
the early application of
advanced anomaly detection
data analysis for existing
helicopter Health and Usage
Monitoring Systems.

The new system will be able to detect
faults that are not being highlighted by
current HUMS analysis.

Offshore meteorological
observation and reporting

Oil & Gas UK is liaising with CAA and
the Met Office to progress CAA
recommendations, including the
requirement for aeronautical
meteorological stations on offshore
installations and formal training of
personnel making meteorological
observations.

http://www.oilandgas.org.uk/media/enews/PLB_update.html[04/06/2009 17:01:02]

Oil & Gas UK E-Newsletter

beacon going off nearby.

Direction Finding (DF) equipment – This is the equipment used on board search and rescue
helicopters and marine vessels to locate and home in on emergency beacons (including
PLBs). Testing needs to be done to identify if any of this equipment needs upgrading so it
can home in on an area if several beacons/PLBs are transmitting in that area.

The outcomes of the meeting for each of these issues are summarised below:

Personal Locator Beacons

There was general agreement by all parties that PLBs should be reintroduced for use on helicopters
by the middle of July; to that end the following actions were agreed:

Each PLB model will go through a series of tests which have been approved by the CAA to
demonstrate that the PLB in question is unlikely to activate accidentally (for example if
dropped or knocked). Once a particular PLB has passed all these tests, the results will be
reviewed by the CAA, helicopter operators and Oil & Gas UK in order to reach agreement for
reintroduction on offshore flights.

Helicopter operators will develop a standard pre-flight briefing for PLBs. The briefing DVD will
also be revised.

Helicopter operators will install 121.5mhz (the frequency PLBs transmit on) receivers onshore
to check that no PLBs have been accidentally activated before boarding. Installation operators
will install similar receivers offshore.

Oil & Gas UK will convene a meeting at the end of June with the CAA and helicopter
operators to agree the final steps towards PLB reintroduction in July.

Smart Locator Beacons 

The CAA will be writing to the helicopter operators to confirm the CAA’s expectation that the
smart locator beacons in the life rafts will be replaced by non-smart beacons.

Helicopter operators will produce a timetable for the replacement of smart locator beacons
and share this with Oil & Gas UK.

The CAA will host a technical meeting with all parties during early June to discuss smart
beacon issues and any other issues arising linked to the reintroduction.

Additional issues

It was also agreed that further tests will be carried out to confirm the ability of Direction Finding
equipment to home in on multiple beacon sources. This work will not need to be completed before
reintroduction of PLBs.

For further information please contact Britta Hallbauer at bhallbauer@oilandgasuk.co.uk or on 01224 577 250.

Unsubscribe: If you do not wish to receive this newsletter, click on the unsubscribe link now and title the email, unsubscribe e-
newsletter

© 2009 United Kingdom Offshore Oil and Gas Industry Association Limited trading as Oil & Gas UK
London: Tel 020 7802 2400  Fax 020 7802 2401    
Aberdeen: Tel 01224 577 250  Fax 01224 577 251
Email info@oilandgasuk.co.uk  Website http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk

 
 

http://www.oilandgas.org.uk/media/enews/PLB_update.html[04/06/2009 17:01:02]

