AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/09 

Safety Flash 

June 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Poor Maintenance and Subsequent Failure of Welding Equipment 

During  a  recent  mobilisation  on  a  member’s  vessel,  sub-contractors  were  burning  and  welding  sea  fastenings  on  the  main 
deck.  Following a report that flames were coming from the contractors’ acetylene tank regulator situated inside the holding 
gas quad, a small fire was extinguished at the regulator, which was then cooled and removed for inspection (see Figure 1).  
On examination it was found that thread tape was being used in all the connections on the contractors’ equipment. 

Acetylene leak 
and flames from 
here 
 

Acetylene leak and 
flames from here 
 

Figure 1 – Leaking regulator 

Figure 2 – Leaking regulator in-situ 

 

 

Further incidents with welding equipment on the same vessel were: 

♦  A ship welding cable was found to be smouldering at a connection point; 

♦  A midway cable connector was found arcing and smoking during deck welding operations; 

♦  A nozzle head was found detached from an oxy-acetylene torch. 

Existing repaired 
cable 
 

Exposed and charred 
cable connector 
 

Figure 3 – Welding cable found to be smouldering 

Figure 4 – Midway cable connector found arcing and smoking 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5 – Detached nozzle head 

 

The company would like to highlight the potential hazards of lack of control and maintenance of ship’s and sub-contractors’ 
welding equipment, as there have been a number of incidents involving welding equipment in a poor state of repair and being 
used whilst unfit for purpose onboard recently. 

Members are also referred to the following incident report issued by the Marine Safety Forum regarding a further welding 
incident. 

It highlights an incident involving a welder who was adjusting the pressure on an oxygen regulator.  The welder had oil on his 
hand and there was an oxygen leak from the hose clamp.  As a result the welder’s hand was badly burnt.   Oxygen under 
pressure  and  hydrocarbons  (oil  and  grease)  can  react  violently,  resulting  in  explosions,  fire  and  injury  to  personnel  and 
damage to property.  Never allow oil or grease or any organic matter to come into contact with oxygen under pressure. 

Leak at 
clamp 
 

Regulator 
adjusting 
knob 
 

Figure 6 – Location of oxygen leak from hose clamp 

 

Figures 7 and 8 – Welder’s burnt hand following oxygen/hydrocarbon fire at leaky hose clamp 

 

 

A member has provided the accompanying checklist for welding equipment which may be useful to members. 

 

 

 

Equipment : 

Pre Mobilisation / Demobilisation Welding Check List 

Yes 

No 

Comments 

Are welding cables and connections in good condition so as to 
prevent arcing on the deck?  Are personnel aware not to run 
cables over lifting equipment in case of arcing? 

Has the burning equipment been fitted with correct flashback 
arrestors, gauges and hose crimps?  

Are all lifting accessories and equipment certified, i.e. baskets, 
bottle racks, lifting slings? 

Is there a lift basket or cage for lifting gas bottles? If not is there 
one available on the vessel? 

Is bulk oxygen and acetylene stored separately at least three 
metres apart? 

Is there a basket available for lifting Sea fastenings onboard? 

Loose Sea fastenings cannot be lifted onboard by pallets.  

Are approved welding procedures available?  

Are personnel aware that, if pre-heating, only rose bud heaters 
are allowed and not cutting torches?  

Worksite: 

Have flammable liquids/gases/solids been identified at the 
worksite? Do they require to be removed, barriered off, 
highlighted or covered with a fire retardant blanket? 

Are all ‘no weld zones’ clearly marked and are personnel aware of 
them? Has a deck plan been issued to vessel supervisor and 
subcontractor showing all the zones? 

Have fire zones been isolated? 

Is there adequate lighting? 

If required to work at height is there suitable access, work 
platforms and safety equipment? 

If required to work over the side, is the crane man riding, basket 
and rigging certified, correct personal protective equipment (PPE) 
and has a risk assessment been completed? 

Have personnel been made aware of correct PPE when working 
next to exposed/unguarded edges and openings? 

Have fire fighting appliances been identified and readily available at 
the work site and firewatchers positions? 

Have provisions for scrap waste and used welding rods been 
provided? 

Have personnel been made aware of vessel movement when it 
comes to setting up their cables from the shore side to the vessel?  

Have personnel been made aware of the restriction on welding on 
or cutting the vessel shear strake?  

Are there provisions to protect the welders during wet weather?   

Have personnel been made aware on the importance of cable 
management and keeping walkways unrestricted? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pre Mobilisation / Demobilisation Welding Check List 

Yes 

No 

Comments 

 

 

 

Personnel: 

Has the permit to work been completed and have all personnel 
read and understood the risk assessment?  

Have contractors had a shore side vessel safety induction? 

Have the firewatchers been given a full safety briefing and 
procedures to follow whilst on duty?  

Has the subcontractor foreman/supervisor been introduced to 
relevant vessel personnel as a point of contact? 

Do the firewatchers have high visibility vests? 

Do the firewatchers have a proven and tested form of 
communication in the event of an emergency? 

Do all contractors have full PPE?  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

