AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/07 

Safety Flash

December 2007 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Small Fire Caused by Portable Fan Heater 

A member has reported an incident in which a small fan heater caused a fire in a cabin.  A crew member, on retiring to his 
bunk, switched on a portable electric fan heater to warm up the inside of his cabin.  It appears that he then went to sleep 
with the heater still switched on.  The crew member awoke to find smoke in the cabin and the smell of burning, and small 
flames were observed coming from the heater.  The heater was immediately unplugged and placed in the cabin sink and the 
water turned on to extinguish the flames.  At this point the vessel fire alarm sounded. 

Damaged fan heater following fire 

 

The company notes the following: 

The  Code  of  Safe  Working  Practices  for  Merchant  Seamen  Chapter  9.3.10  states  that  “Personal  portable  space  heating 
appliances of any sort should not be used at sea and notices to this effect should be displayed.” 

This was a high potential incident which could have resulted in a major fire within the accommodation of the vessel. 

The company has made the following suggestions: 

vessel; 

♦  Vessel  masters  should  ensure  that  no  ‘personal  portable  space  heating  appliances’  are  currently  in  use  onboard  their 

♦  Any such appliances that are discovered should be removed; 

♦  Only approved and fully integrated means of supplying heat to cabin areas should be used. 

 

2  Bell Contamination 

A member has reported that during a recent diving project, a subsea fitting failure caused divers to become contaminated 
with a hazardous substance released from a hose under pressure.  Diver 1 subsequently returned to the bell and entered the 
bell and was allowed to enter without taking the necessary precautions to ensure that he was free from contamination.  On 
removal of his diving helmet, he reported to the bellman that he felt faint.  The diver was put on to the built-in breathing 
system (BIBS) and the bell was flushed through.  Decontamination measures were then taken and diver 2 was subsequently 
recovered to the bell.  During this incident a Hyper-Gas II analyser situated in the bell did not alarm and the bellman said he 
was unaffected. 

A review of the incident was carried out by the member company, noting the following points: 

♦  The analyser in use was an infra-red analyser that looks at the specific band of light related to crude oil and condensate 
and cannot necessarily be relied upon when vapour from only one or two specific hydrocarbons are present, as these 
may fall outside the band of infra red light being analysed; 

♦  Where the analyser is to be used in an environment where vapour from other hydrocarbons could be present, it may be 

advisable to reset the analyser specifically to respond to these hydrocarbons; 

♦  While the Hyper-Gas II analyser is capable of seeing specific fractions of hydrocarbons as part of crude or condensate 
mix, such fractions need to be at a relatively high concentration before the unit will alarm, e.g. 10% of the anaesthetic 
requirement.  Concentrations of other chemical substances may also be at levels well above the occupational exposure 
standard  (OES)  and  be  well  on  the  way  to  a  level  that  will  incapacitate  the  bell  occupants,  with  potentially  fatal 
consequences, before an alarm is given; 

♦  The levels of individual hydrocarbons which cause anaesthesia are several orders of magnitude higher than the allowed 
occupational  exposure  standard  for  each  compound.    This  being  so  the  Hyper-Gas  II  cannot  be,  and  has  never  been 
presented as, a first line warning of hydrocarbon contamination in the bell; 

♦  Human sensory awareness can, in some circumstances, detect  (but not quantify) substances before electronic devices.  

However, this must never be relied upon as a means of detection; 

♦  Although the bell is small, contamination may occur in one area of the bell but not in others.  This will depend on gas 
flows  within  the  bell,  composition/molecular  weight  of  the  contaminant  chemicals  and  also  how  the  contaminant  is 
introduced into the bell, e.g. by the umbilical, contaminated clothing or gaseous ingress into the bell trunk.  In two- and 
three-man bells mixing would naturally occur due to the restricted volume. 

Members are reminded of the following: 

♦  Analysers  can  usually  only  warn  of  an  event  once  it  is  occurring  and  they  should  not  be  relied  upon  as  the  primary 
warning  of bell  contamination.    Prevention  of  contamination  and the use  of  enhanced  diving  techniques  should  be  the 
primary defence against bell contamination; 

♦  Where contamination is possible, enhanced diving procedures should be used.  These include: correct bell positioning, 
the use of BIBS by the bellman prior to diver recovery and prior to assisting the diver when contamination is suspected, 
decontamination  of  umbilical,  removal  of protective  coveralls  and  thorough  diver  decontamination  prior  to  bell entry, 
testing of the bell atmosphere using the appropriate Draeger tubes to confirm bell conditions; 

♦  At the planning stage of an operation, the project engineer should ensure any chemicals/hazardous substance used during 
the operation, or contained within the system to be worked on, are identified and a material safety data sheet (MSDS) is 
obtained; 

♦  The MSDS for each substance should be presented to the project safety adviser, who will arrange for a safety assessment 

to be completed, including a diving assessment; 

♦  A review of the chemical/hazardous substance will consider the need for any additional specific Draeger tubes to identify 

contamination/quantify bell atmospheric conditions. 

A video showing the effects of an anaesthetic chemical within a contaminated bell is available from Analox. 

 

 

3  Failure of a High Pressure Gas Charging Hose 

A member has reported the failure of a high pressure (HP) gas charging hose during routine gas decanting to top up the gas 
banks of a mobile surface supplied diving system which had been installed into a small craft used for remote diving operations. 

During the gas bank decanting, an HP gas charging hose ruptured and its recoil force caused shear failure of an isolation valve 
fitting which was serving as an anchor for the HP hose whip check. 

The  resulting  failure  of  the  valve  fitting  connection  caused  a  restrained  flailing  of  the  hose  and  valve  fitting  which  became 
entangled on the structure of the small craft. 

All gas banks were immediately isolated, which prevented any personnel injury or further equipment damage. 

King valve and regulator on quad 

Isolation/relief valves 

on deck 

HP charging hose from supply quad used for decanting  

 

Charge point  

isolation valve stem 

One end of whip  

check  

anchored here 

Failed HP hose  

connected 

here 

Charging point assembly in small craft 

 

Stem of isolation valve 

on charge point  

Whip check still in its 

anchoring position 

Ruptured 5m 
long HP hose 

 

 

Whip check still in its 
anchoring positions 

 

 

Ruptured hose with sheared fitting/valve attached 

¼” NPT Nipple snapped off from diver charging manifold  

After investigation by the company involved, the following points were highlighted: 

♦  The whip check was anchored on a pressurised valve; 

♦  There was a failure to recognise the force of recoil and effect on the whip check anchor point; 

♦  The safe positioning of personnel performing the operation was inadequate. 

Members are urged to consider the following: 

♦  A review of whip check anchoring methods on all HP hoses; 

♦  An inspection of all hoses for any indication of defect; 

♦  The use of dedicated anchor connection points for whip checks; 

♦  An alternative design of whip check that ensures the whip is held at the very end of its length i.e. Chinese finger style; 

♦  A review of the service life for high pressure flexible hoses looking at the original date of whip manufacture and how 

many pressurisation cycles the whip has had. 

4  Divex HSE Alert HSE003-2007 – ‘Helinaut’ Sacrificial Hose Whips 

Divex has asked IMCA to circulate the attached Divex HSE Alert. 

5  Divex HSE Alert HSE001-2007 – Valve Seat Retainer 

Divex  has  asked  IMCA  to  recirculate  the  attached  Divex  HSE  Alert,  first  issued  in  IMCA  Safety  Flash  02/07,  in  order  to 
ensure companies and their worksites around the world are aware of this issue. 

DIVEX HSE ALERT 

 
 
HSE Alert No. HSE003-2007
 
 
 
 
“Helinaut” Sacrificial Hose whips 
 
 
Part No: C1506B 
 
 
 
DATE 

 
COUNTRY: 

December 

7th 

 
 

2007 

  

 

Divex Ltd. 
Enterprise Drive 
Westhill, Aberdeen 
AB32 6TQ, United Kingdom 

Telephone  +44 (0)1224 740145 
Facsimile   +44 (0)1224 740172 
E-mail  

info@divex.co.uk 

 
LOCATION: 

 
 

 
 
Product safety notice 003/2007 
  
Divex part # C1506B - "Helinaut" sacrificial reclaim whips 
  
A potential problem has been identified with the C1506B "Helinaut" reclaim hose sacrificial whips, which are 
used  between  the  Diver's  reclaim/exhaust  helmet  connection  and  the  divers  excursion  umbilical  reclaim 
hose itself. 
  
The problem which has been identified is:- 
  
Some end fittings/hose barbs are not sufficiently crimped to ensure security! 
We have had an incident reported where a Diver in the water had an end fitting coming out of the crimped hose 
thus losing reclaim. 
Whilst  not,  we  believe,  life  threatening  as  the  Diver  will  merely  lose  reclaim  and  go  on  “open  circuit”,  this  is 
obviously unacceptable and Divex have put in place measures to address future production and ensure all stock 
is fully fit for purpose. 
These hoses  are  now  made  using  a  Cortland  Fibron  hose  (shiny  black  smooth  hose-  with  the  hose  braid 
"almost visible through the outer jacket”). 
This hose has an OD of 21mm which results in a finished crimp dia.of 21.3mm - 21.6mm. 
  
Older hoses were made from a JDR hose which had a hose dia. of 22mm - 23 mm and resulted in a finished 
crimp size of 23.5mm - 23.7mm. 
  
We  would  advise  ALL  users  of  C1506B  “Helinaut”  sacrificial whips  purchased  since 
January 2006 to,  as a matter of urgency:- 
 
Check all your base stock and worksite inventory for integrity & security of both end 
fittings. 
 
 
Users must for each hose end fitting - check the following:- 
  

     
     

a)    Measure the crimp diameter and ensure they are within the tolerances above. 
b)    The crimp itself is not free to turn. 
c)    Pressure test the hose to 10 Bar and check for leaks 
d)  Perform a pull test on each end by applying a load of 100N  ( 10 kilo’s)  

 
Should you find any hoses which:- 
 
     
    
    
     
  
Divex will rework/replace any faulty hoses without charge. 
 

a)    Are out with the crimp tolerance shown above  
b)    Have end fittings or crimps which are or appear to be loose 
c)    Leak. 
d)    Give concern in any way  

Rev 1 

 

         Page 1 of 2 

 
 
The returned goods should be sent to your nearest Divex office, carriage charges paid. 
 
For Europe based  customers  pls  return  to  Divex  Ltd.  Aberdeen  Office,  stating  the  authorised  RGA  number 
which our sales/operations dept. shall give you. 
Please contact Divex Aberdeen Sales dept. via:- 
  
    E-mail sales@divexglobal.com 
  
    Phone + 44 - 1224 - 746500 
  
    Fax    +44 - 1224 - 740172 
  
Please mention Divex Safety notice xx/2007 and the qty of hoses you are going to return & you will be given an 
RGA # for the authorised return.  
  
Divex shall replace/re-work all returned hoses which are found to be faulty. 
  
Divex have  amended  the  work  instructions  to  ensure  the  correct  crimp  diameters  are  now clearly  stated & 
understood  plus  we  have added a 10  kilo  "pull  test" in  addition  to  10  Bar  leak  testing  which  every  hose  is 
subject to. 
  
In  addition  Divex  have re-trained  all  our  Production  Staff  in  the  updated process  and  re-emphasised  the 
criticality of production & quality control of "Life Support Equipment". 
  
Any queries on this issue should be addressed to:- 
  
James Massie - Product Engineer- jmassie@divexglobal.com 
  
Malcolm Cattanach - Commercial Product & Projects Manager - mcattanach@divexglobal.com 
 

Issued 7th December 2007 

Malcolm Cattanach 
Commercial Projects & Products Manager 

Divex Ltd. 
Enterprise Drive, 
Westhill Industrial Estate, Westhill, 
Aberdeen, Scotland, UK. AB32 6TQ 
Tel:   +44 (0) 1224 740145 
Fax:  +44 (0) 1224 740172 
E-Mail: mcattanach@divexglobal.com 

 

  

 

Rev 1 

 

         Page 2 of 2 

DIVEX HSE ALERT 

 

  

Divex Ltd. 
Enterprise Drive 
Westhill, Aberdeen 
AB32 6TQ, United Kingdom 

 
 
HSE Alert No. HSE001-2007
 
 
 
 
Valve Seat Retainer 
 
 
Part No: D1998 
 
 
 
DATE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Divex has been advised of some problems which customers have experienced when using Ultraflow "balanced 
demand valve helmets" at the top end of the acceptable supply pressure range i.e 15-20 bar. 
 

Telephone  +44 (0)1224 740145 
Facsimile   +44 (0)1224 740172 
e-mail  

 
LOCATION: 

 
COUNTRY: 

 
21/02/07 

info@divex.co.uk 

 
 

 
 

 
            Symptoms reported include :-  

 
1) technicians experiencing difficulty in setting up the regulators correctly,  
2) the valve stem entering too far into the seat / seat retainer and sticking,  
3) a reduction in flow from the regulator as the supply pressure was increased. 
 
We have investigated the cause and have concluded that a batch of seat material which was at the bottom end 
of the acceptable hardness range is responsible for symptom 2.  
 
 
It was found that a less than perfect glue joint was allowing supply gas behind the seat and causing the seat 
material to part company with the retainer adjacent to the bore.  The seat then pushed the valve stem forward 
causing the roller lever to drop while maintaining a gas tight seal and is responsible for symptom 3. 
 
 

            Divex recommend that all valve seat retainers are tested as a matter of urgency as described below:- 

 
1) Remove the regulator cover and diaphragm, 
2) Connect a variable pressure breathing gas supply, 
3) Adjust the supply pressure gradually from zero to 10 bar and note the amount of free play at the roller end of the 
roller lever. 
4) Increase the supply pressure gradually to 20 bar and monitor the free play.  An increase in the free play of up to 
2mm indicates that the seat retainer is acceptable.  If the increase is greater than 2mm then the seat retainer 
should be replaced with a new unit. 
 
 
If, for operational reasons, it is not possible to conduct the above tests immediately then Divex recommends that 
the maximum supply pressure is limited to 12 bar until tests are completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Rev 1 

Page 1 of 2

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Divex will replace all faulty valve seat retainers.  Please advise the Divex Aberdeen sales office of the quantity 
required.  These will be shipped carriage free and invoiced at standard spare part price. Any faulty valve seat 
retainers returned to Divex Aberdeen quoting the sales order ref we give at time of replacement ordering will be 
credited at full price. 
 
 
 
 
 
NAME: 

 
 
Malcolm Cattanach 

 
 
21/02/07 

 
 
 TITLE: 

 
 
DATE: 

Projects  & 

 
 
Commercial 
Products Manager 

 
  for and on behalf of Divex Ltd. 

Rev 1 

Page 2 of 2

