Safety Flash 

October 2017 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 27/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

In this safety flash, the first four incidents cover, respectively, a laptop battery fire, the risks of scalding, a dropped 
object, and equipment failure leading to injured personnel. The second three relate to product recalls or safety 
alerts relating to: 

 

‘Eurogrit’ – due to asbestos contamination; 

  Potential failure of ADAMS ‘MAK’ automated flanged valves; 

  Safety features of the Siemens Maxum Edition II gas chromatograph. 

1 

Laptop Battery Fire 

What happened 

A laptop battery exploded and caught fire. The incident happened in a 
workshop  setting.    The  laptop  was  being  used  to  control  certain 
operations, which had been recently completed.  The laptop itself was 
switched off at the time but was on charge at the mains.  

The  laptop was  on  a  wooden  topped  work  bench.    A  loud  bang  was 
heard from the laptop, after which it caught fire.  Crew were nearby 
and immediately extinguished the fire by using the adjacent 3kg CO2 
extinguisher.  Owing to the quick reaction in extinguishing the fire, the 
vessel’s General Alarm was not activated.  

Having extinguished the laptop, it was safely removed from the power 
source and removed to a safe location on the steel deck outside where 
it could cool down. 

What went wrong/causes 

The  cause  of  the  fire  was  the  overheating  and  subsequent  partial 
explosion of the laptop lithium-ion battery. 

The  last  portable  appliance  testing  (PAT)  of  this  item  had  been 
conducted three months before. 

  There was a quick and professional response to the fire which swiftly brought it under control before it spread; 

  Address  the  issue of  potential  faulty  laptop  batteries  –  full  asset  review  to establish  whether  desktops  and 

 
Lessons learnt 

  The laptop was in date for PAT. 

Actions taken 

laptops need replacing;  

  Ensure all laptops are tested and inspected as required by PAT;  

  Consider whether or not laptops should be left unattended whilst plugged in. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

 

Laptop battery fire and explosion 

  Mobile phone charger failures 

2 

Two Near Miss Incidents with a Risk of Scalding 

Seahealth.DK www.seahealth.dk/en has kindly shared this safety alert with 
IMCA.  

Incident 1: Blowing boilers 

What happened: A heavy rain of scalding water from the funnel fell down 
on the boat  deck when the  engine department was blowing the  boilers.  
The possible consequences would have been major, had crew been on the 
boat deck  below  the  chimney  at  the time.   The engine  room crew were 
unaware that blowing of the boilers could cause a drop down of scalding 
water from the chimney.  

Lesson learnt: This matter of ‘blowing of the boilers’ had been discussed 
before and the engine room crew on board had already acknowledged the hazard, but the learning had not been 
implemented into daily work and routines.  Constant reminders were required as time goes by, basic safety issues 
could easily be forgotten. 

Incident 2: Maintenance ends in an almost scalding situation 

What happened: Crew were carrying out maintenance on the vessel’s engine, involving fitting protective shields 
around two cylinders to prevent the escape of pressurised hot gas.  Work on the shield for the second cylinder 
proved more complex than expected.  When fitting the second shield the cooling water pipe was dislodged and the 
hot water poured out and almost scalded a crew member. 

Cause: An engineer removed the bolts to a cooling water pipe to make more space available.  While moving the 
shield the engineer dislodged the cooling pipe. 

Learning:  Management of change: revaluate the risks presented by a job as it becomes more complex.  Don’t rush 
hazardous work.   Isolate engine-room systems to increase safety.   Ensure all crew involved in maintenance  are 
aware of how the task should be completed.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

  Crewman badly scalded during tank cleaning 

  First aid injury: Person scalded by steam condensate 

 
3  High Potential Dropped Object Near Miss: Steel Ferrule Failure 

What happened 

A winch wire failed causing a pennant assembly and wire to fall directly into a crane basket.  There were no injuries.  
The incident occurred whilst operating a forward utility or ‘tugger’ hoist.  Weight was taken by the winch to support 
a 1.5t basket, to assist the crane in removing the basket from the drill floor.  The winch wire was under tension and 
the load was 5cm above the deck, when the winch wire failed sending the pennant assembly and wire directly down 
into the basket itself and finally coming to rest on the forward winch. 

The 20mm steel wire rope was pulled out of its Flemish eye termination due to a failure of the ferrule.  The Marine 
Safety Forum (MSF) member reporting the incident considered that the incident had the potential to have been a 
fatality or to have caused multiple major injuries. 

What went wrong/causes 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

Steel wire ropes should be checked for the correct crimping of the ferrule.  Care should be taken to ensure that the 
ferrule shape is correct and the condition is good.  In the case of 20mm steel ferrules, the 20mm steel ferrule when 
pressed should have been round and not hexagonal.  Any 20mm steel wire ropes not meeting that criterion should 
be removed from service. 

Correctly pressed 20mm steel ferrule 

Incorrectly pressed 20mm steel ferrule 

 

 

Note: Other rope sizes and ropes from other suppliers may have hexagonal ferrules and should be inspected. 

4  A Structural Failure Leads to Uncontrolled Motion of a ‘Billy Pugh’ Basket and Injuries to Crew 

What happened 

The United States Bureau of Safety & Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has issued a bulletin (see here) about an 
incident in which a ‘Billy Pugh’ basket was subject to uncontrolled motion leading to three crew being injured.  Four 
offshore personnel in the Gulf of Mexico were subject to uncontrolled motion while being transferred from a vessel 
to a production facility via the ‘Billy Pugh’ basket hoisted by a Titan model T5400B boom crane.  The boom began 
to  swing  due  to  the  wind,  and  neither  the  swing  brake  lock  nor  attempts  to  reverse  the  swing  stopped  the 
uncontrolled motion.  The basket subsequently hit the railing on the vessel which caused injuries to three of the 
four offshore personnel. 

What went wrong/causes 

Investigation determined that the crane’s hydraulic swing gear motor (slew drive system) had failed, which made 
it impossible to control the lateral movement of the boom.  The mounting pad eye brackets that secured the swing 
gear drive housing to the crane cab base had sheared, allowing the housing to deflect under loading and the swing 
gears  to  disengage  from  each  other.  The  disengaged  swing  gears  prevented  any  control  of  swing  motion  and 
effectively disabled the crane during the personnel lift. The BSEE investigation concluded the following: 

 
  The mounting bolts either backed out during operations due to vibration or other operational causes, or the 

bolts were never fully tightened to torque specification when the crane was installed; 

  The loose bolts allowed the swing gear motor mount to deflect under loading, which put unplanned stresses 

on the pad eye mounting brackets until the brackets sheared; 

 

Inspection of these bolts for any loosening and to insure the proper torque setting is not a normal part of daily 
pre-use, quarterly, or annual inspection(s) of the crane; 

  Abnormal movement of the  swing gear motor under loading, resulting from failure of the securing bolts or 

mounting brackets, may only be detectable by personnel looking for that specific failure. 

 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

BSEE recommended the following actions: 

  Read the full BSEE Accident Investigation Report Incident Date 27 January 2017; 

  Evaluate the condition of the mounting brackets and the torque values of the bolts securing the swing drive 

gear housing of cranes; 

  Consider incorporating specific periodic examination (quarterly and/or annual inspections) of the crane swing 

drives, including pad eye connections and bolts; 

  Review  this  incident  with  all  personnel  and  organisations  that  work  with  crane  operations,  including  crane 

personnel, crane contractors, crane manufacturers, riggers, and inspectors. 

Members may wish to refer  to the  following similar incidents (these  focus on  ‘Billy  Pugh’  incidents rather than 
shearing or other failure of equipment): 

  Fatality during basket transfer 

  Rigging incident 

5 

Safety Alert Regarding the Product ‘Eurogrit’: Asbestos contamination 

A member has passed to us a safety alert regarding the product ‘Eurogrit’, an aluminium silicate (coal slag) blast 
cleaning abrasive, which has been contaminated with asbestos (Chrysotile). 

This product may be in use in ship yards, dry docks etc. 

The following text is copied from the notification: 

 

Eurogrit blasting grit recall campaign on account of small quantities of asbestos fibres 

An independent and recognised research institute commissioned by Eurogrit has noted after analysis that small 
quantities of the chrysotile type of asbestos fibres (also known as ‘white asbestos’) can occur in Eurogrit coal 
slag blasting grit (aluminium silicate). 

According  to  experts,  the  quantities  found  are  so  small  that  the  product  itself  does  not  present  any  health 
risks.  When the use involves prolonged unprotected exposure, increased health risks cannot be ruled out.  

The  products  in  question  are  primarily  supplied  to  professional  industrial  processors  such  as  blasting  grit 
companies. Eurogrit has informed them and asked them to no longer use or re-sell the product.  

A limited quantity is also supplied to construction centres, rental companies and to individual consumers through 
our factory in Dordrecht. The products for consumers are supplied in 25-kg brown paper bags and with Abrasive 
ISO 11126N/CS/G marked in blue on the packaging. 

We are asking all consumers who have bought this product not to use it. Consumers’ closed packs should remain 
closed and open packs should be packed in a plastic bin bag. Consumers may then contact our support staff on 
+32  (0)  28920538  or  sales.eurogrit@sibelco.com.  They  will  then  be  given  further  information  on  disposal 
methods and financial compensation. They can also contact our support staff if they have any other questions. 
We are available from Monday to Saturday from 8 am to 8 pm. 

www.eurogrit.nl/uk_us  

Please see the following for further information: 

  Manufacturer’s notification  

  Manufacturer’s product datasheet 

6  Product Safety Retrofit Notice: MAK Automated Flanged Valves 3", 4", 6", 8" and 12"/600# 

A product-safety retrofit notice was issued by ADAMS Armaturen GmbH on 23 December 2016 and this has been 
recently highlighted by the International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP). 

The letter of notification from the manufacturer can be downloaded here.  

The IOGP Safety Alert, #290, is here.  

The following text is copied from the notification. 
 

Our MAK automated flanged valves MAK 3", 4", 6", 8" and 12"/600# have shown that the Thrust Bearing of the 
shaft can be exposed to higher than anticipated wear while in operation. If the wearing becomes too high there 
is a chance that the shaft can be discharged from the valve.  

This has the potential to cause personal injury or damage to the surrounding area.  

The Thrust Bearing is marked as a wearing part in the part list.  

We strongly advise that you immediately inspect the Thrust Bearing with a depressurized valve to check for 
exposed wear, and contact us immediately for further action!  

To address the issue, we will provide you with a modified Thrust Bearing and clamping device that will extend 
the life of the Thrust Bearing and mitigate the risk of premature failure.  

Please confirm that you have received this information and that the information has been forwarded to the 
relevant person in your plant.  

 

Please use the following information to contact us: product_info@adams-valves.com 

Please note that ADAMS takes great pride in its Quality promise and that is why we are proactively informing 
you about these findings. 

7 

Safety Features of the Siemens Maxum Edition II Gas Chromatograph 

What happened 

An incident occurred involving one of these instruments, in which an instrument technician was injured as a result 
of an explosion. 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) has issued a safety bulletin regarding the safety features of the Siemens 
Maxum Edition II gas chromatograph (GC). It is aimed at those using the Siemens Maxum Edition  II GC which is 
believed to be widely in use in the oil, gas and chemicals industries.  The purpose of the GC is to analyse samples of 
chemicals  and  determine  the  composition.    The  unit  is  Atmosphères  Explosibles  (ATEX)  certified  for  use  in 
potentially hazardous areas. 

What went wrong/causes 

An incident occurred involving one of these instruments, in which an instrument technician was injured as a result 
of an explosion. The GC was being returned to service after being left in ‘hold’ status, during this ‘hold’ period 
flammable  gas  (hydrogen)  had  accumulated  in  the  electronics  enclosure  of  the  GC.  The  main  safety  feature  to 
prevent the potential build-up of gas, an automatic purge unit, was not re-engaged as part of the start-up operation. 
It  is  possible  to  bypass  the  automatic  purge  unit  prior  to  start  up  by  setting  the  GC  mode  from  ‘operation’  to 
‘maintenance’ using a key located behind the detector cabinet panel. 

An issue was discovered after an incident when an instrument technician was injured as a result of an explosion. 
The  GC  was  being  returned  to  service  after  being  left  in  ‘hold’  status;  during  this  ‘hold’  period  flammable  gas 
(hydrogen) had accumulated in the electronics enclosure of the GC. The main safety feature to prevent the potential 
build-up of gas, an automatic purge unit, was not re-engaged as part of the start-up operation. It is possible to 
bypass the automatic purge unit prior to start up by setting the GC mode from ‘operation’ to ‘maintenance’ using 
a key located behind the detector cabinet panel. 

The injuries sustained were life changing and could have been even more serious. 

Although the incident occurred whilst operating the Siemens Maxum II GC unit there is the possibility that a similar 
set of circumstances may be replicated with GC equipment from other manufacturers. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  Users of Siemens Maxum Edition II GCs should review the operation of the units, specifically the automatic 

purge unit control, making specific reference to the latest version of the maintenance manual; 

  Users of Siemens Maxum Edition II GCs should discuss the suitability of their current operating arrangements 

for the GCs with Siemens; 

  Users  of  GCs  produced  by  other  manufacturers  should  discuss  the  suitability  of  their  current  operating 

arrangements for the GCs with the manufacturers. 

Related links 

  UK HSE bulletin: www.hse.gov.uk/safetybulletins/siemens-maxum.htm  

 

IOGP Safety Alert 291: http://safetyzone.iogp.org/SafetyAlerts/alerts/Detail.asp?alert_id=291 

  Siemens  UK  product  support:  http://w3.siemens.com/mcms/sensor-systems/en/process-analytics/process-

gas-chromatograph/maxum-edition-ii/pages/maxum-edition-ii.aspx 

