AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/10 

 July 2010 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Burnt Out Electrical Socket 

A member has reported an incident in which an electrical socket caught fire.  A member of the vessel crew was woken from 
sleep in his cabin by a popping sound.  Shortly thereafter, he smelled burning.  He immediately got up and saw smoke coming 
from a 6 way multi-socket plugged into the mains.  The crew member’s mobile phone and cabin television were plugged into 
the  6  way  multi-socket.    He  immediately  extinguished  the  smouldering  socket  and  reported  the  incident.    There  were  no 
injuries.  

An examination of the socket showed that one of the surge capacitors had blown with enough heat to burn the socket.  An 
identical socket, which had been purchased at the same time as the one involved in the incident, seemed to be working fine.  
However, it was taken out of service to assist in preventing any risk of possible recurrence.  It was ascertained that the 6 
way multi-socket had been purchased by a member of the vessel crew from a shop in the last port visited by the vessel.    

The inside of the 6 way socket extension, showing the damage caused inside the unit 

 

Direct and Root Causes 

The direct cause of the incident was failed/defective portable electrical equipment – an oversurge of electrical current into 
the 6 way multi-socket caused the internal components, and external casing, to overheat and start smouldering. 

The root cause was failure to follow procedures – specific procedures in place to control electrical equipment onboard the 
vessel were not complied with.  The aim of this procedure was to ensure that all vessel electrical equipment, crew personal 
electrical equipment and third party project equipment is presented to the vessel electrician, prior to use on the vessel, to 
verify and test that it is safe and fit for purpose. 

All  crew  and  contractors  are  informed  of  this  procedure  during  vessel  induction,  and  portable  appliance  testing  (PAT) 
equipment is available.  The member of crew who purchased the 6 way multi-socket did not follow the procedure and did 
not present the multi-way socket to the vessel electrician.  No check was made to ensure that the socket was safe for use 
with the vessel electrical supply.  Had the socket been presented to the electrician, it would have been established that it was 
not suitable/compatible with the mains electrical set-up on the vessel and should not have been used. 

 

Corrective/Preventative Actions 

♦  A thorough electrical inspection of the cabin involved in the incident was carried out and it was found to be safe.  The 

inspection showed that the cabin television had already been PAT tested, with testing label clearly visible and in date; 

♦  A thorough sweep was undertaken onboard the vessel and all unsuitable multi-way sockets were removed. 

Lessons Learnt 

♦  Vessel procedures exist to ensure the safety and well-being of all persons onboard and should be complied with in order 

to prevent the potential for accidents/incidents; 

♦  Although electrical items may be new and safe for use, this does not necessarily mean that they are safe to use onboard 

a vessel; they may possibly only be suitable for domestic/home use; 

♦  All electrical items should be presented to the vessel electrician so that any doubt over condition or suitability for use 

♦  Consideration  of  long-term  plans  to  rewire  vessels  to  remove  2-pin  sockets  and  install  3-pin  UK  switched  sockets 

can be addressed; 

throughout.  

2  Water Ingress to Bow Thruster Space 

A member has reported an incident in which flooding occurred in the bow thruster space of a vessel, resulting in damage to 
the bow thruster.  The vessel’s crew were emptying a fresh water tank using the bow thruster room direct bilge eductor 
system via the fire main.  The bilge alarm was activated, acknowledged and accepted by the duty engineer who was about to 
complete his watch and was preparing for the handover.  The status of the bilge alarm was verbally passed to the next duty 
engineer, but owing to distraction the engineer forgot about the alarm and the bilges were allowed to fill up.  The flooding 
was discovered after 36 hours when the water reached the floor plate level.  As a result of the flooding, parts essential to the 
bow thruster were damaged beyond repair and scheduled sea trials had to be postponed.   

The impact of this incident was significant in terms of breaching basic watch-keeping routines and damage to equipment.  Our 
member’s subsequent investigation identified a number of key issues and lessons learnt. 

Key Issues 

♦  Failure of basic watch-keeping practices; 

♦  Lack of understanding of Chief Engineer’s Standing Orders; 

♦  Lack of routine inspection and cleaning of bilge suction valves and filters; 

♦  Absence of an approved bilge system drawing; 

♦  System integrity not inspected prior to use and followed up during operation. 

Lessons Learnt 

♦  Chief  Engineer’s  Standing  Orders  should  contain  clear  instructions  regarding  watch-keeping  routines,  especially  with 

reference to  acknowledgement of alarms and subsequent actions by the duty engineer; 

♦  All alarms should be investigated immediately and acted on accordingly by the duty engineer.  Bilge high levels should not 
be  left  in  the  alarm  condition.    These  must  be  investigated  and  pumped  out  completely  and  the  cause  verified  and 
rectified; 

♦  A  complete  set  of  instructions  for  the use  of  the bilge  system  should  be  available  to  watch-keepers  and  engine  room 

staff; 

♦  Watch-keepers and engine room staff should be familiar with the operation of the bilge system; 

♦  Bilge suction filters and the condition of SDNR (screw down non-return) valves should be checked at regular intervals to 

make sure there is no debris between the seating faces; 

♦  Bilge system drawings should be verified against the existing system, and if any amendments are necessary these should 

be made by the company drawing office approved by the Classification Society; 

♦  Bilge system drawings should be included in vessel familiarisation for joining engineering staff. 

 

3  Diver Injury During Air Cylinder Recharging 

A member has reported a blown-out pillar valve resulting in injury to a diver working on deck. 

The diver had been assigned to recharge a number of bale-out cylinders using compressed air, considered by the member to 
be part of routine operations.  The recharging was performed in a dedicated open deck area.  In this instance, the recharging 
of  this  particular  air  cylinder  was  being  carried  out  for  the  first  time  onboard,  as  the  cylinders  had  been  delivered  to  the 
worksite empty due to safety consideration during transportation.  

After hearing  a  loud noise,  members of the dive team immediately proceeded to the recharging station where the injured 
diver, who had been working alone, was found laying down on the deck bleeding around his right eye.  The cylinder pillar 
valve was found to be disconnected from the air cylinder. 

The injured diver was found to be unconscious but regained consciousness after having been moved to a safe location. 

Medical  treatment  procedures  were  initiated,  resulting  in  the  injured  diver  being  given  first  aid  on-site  and  subsequent 
medevac to shore. 

  

 

The incident investigation carried out by the member company found that the diver had sustained a head injury due to the 
accidental disconnection of the air cylinder’s pillar valve, coupled with the filling hose of the air compressor contacting the 
diver’s head. 

The  investigation  showed  the  root  cause  of  the  incident  to  be  an  incorrect  coupling  between  the  pillar  valve  and  the  air 
cylinder in that the pillar valve had an external metric thread of M25x2 whilst the cylinder had a Whitworth imperial thread 
of 1 inch (25.4 mm).  The two threads are technically incompatible and did not provide a correct connection between the 
pillar valve and the air cylinder. 

 

 

 

The investigation further found that the assembly procedure had not complied with EN 250-2000 and EN 144-1; a company 
requirement where only metric threads are to be used. 

The  member  stopped  all  activities,  checked  all  air  cylinder  threads  and  pillar  valve  threads  for  compatibility,  ensured  their 
appointed subcontractor had developed working procedures and instructions for marking and checking pillar valves and air 
cylinders, and ensured that a QHSE (quality, health, safety & environment) audit of the subcontractor had been performed 
onboard and at their premises onshore. 

The member company further stipulated that a dedicated JSA/HAZID was to be developed for each critical operation. 

Members are reminded of safety flash IMCA 12/09 covering a similar incident. 

 

 

 

4  Near Miss: Crane Wire Grease and Headache Ball 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crane  load  fell  1-2  metres  as  a  result  of  a  riding  turn.    During  a  project 
mobilisation in the hours of darkness, a small tool basket (<30kg) was being lifted from the quayside to the deck of the vessel.  
Despite the poor lighting conditions, the crane driver noticed a riding turn on the whipline winch.  He informed all personnel 
in the vicinity to stand clear and having confirmed they had done so, he manoeuvred the jib and the basket fell about 1-2m. 
He then raised the load and slewed round to the stern of the vessel.  The riding turn was remedied with the assistance of the 
bosun and the crane returned to normal service.  There was no damage to equipment and no injuries.  

This  incident  was  not  reported  to  any  supervisory  personnel  until  later  in  the  shift  when  another  unrelated  incident 
occurred.    This  crane  incident  came  to  light  in  the  subsequent  discussions  and  further  investigation  of  this  incident  took 
place.    It  was  noted  that  the  whipline  had  been  greased  recently  and  the  viscosity  of  the  grease  was  such  that  the  wire 
became sticky when passing through the cheek plates on the jib.  Further investigation revealed that the headache ball system 
had been changed from that used originally.  A non-locking hook arrangement weighing 302kg was replaced with a locking 
one weighing 20kg.  The combination of the light load, light headache ball arrangement and adhesive grease caused the riding 
turn on the winch drum. 

The following conclusions were drawn: 

symptom of a deeper problem; 

more serious consequences; 

♦  The  action  of  the  crane  driver  and  bosun  had  successfully  rectified  the  riding  turn,  but  the  riding  turn  was  only  a 

♦  The  cause  of  the  riding  turn  was  not  fully  established  at  the  time  and  could  have  easily  occurred  again,  possibly  with 

♦  The headache ball change-out was conducted without use of management of change procedures, and the reason for the 

change was not established or recorded; 

♦  Because the incident was not reported when it occurred, there was no opportunity to: 

– 
– 
– 

identify root causes; 
apply appropriate corrective actions; 
communicate the lessons learnt to personnel on the same vessel and throughout the fleet. 

Lessons Learnt 

installation; 

♦  A  heavier  temporary  arrangement  was  installed  later  in  the  shift  and  a  permanent  arrangement  was  ordered  for  later 

♦  Personnel should be encouraged to report seemingly benign events to supervisory and management personnel who can 

then judge whether or not further action is required; 

♦  Personnel should be encouraged to enquire further when the unexpected happens – simply asking the “why” question 

could have revealed a number of relevant facts which can then be acted upon; 

♦  Our member required personnel to manage change effectively, particularly when conducting work for which an existing 

plan is not proving effective or when making substantial changes to equipment and systems. 

5  Oxy-Arc Umbilical Handling Winch – Fire on Deck 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  where  the triple  drum  umbilical  handling  winch  for  subsea  oxy-arc  cutting  equipment 
caught fire. 

The on deck fire alarm was raised 21 minutes after the equipment had first been made ‘hot’ and cutting had commenced by 
the divers. 

All  personnel  responded  to  the  alarm  correctly,  the  fire  was  extinguished  using  local  fire  extinguishers,  the  divers  were 
recovered in a controlled and safe manner to the system and the vessel exited the 500 metre zone to ensure the area was 
safe and to allow a preliminary investigation to take place. 

The preliminary investigation showed that the amperage on the welding machine was set at 803 amps.  This was in excess of 
the normal value of 150-250 amps recommended for oxy- arc cutting.  

This high amperage caused the insulation around the welding unit connection at the triple drum interior connection plate to 
breakdown/melt, causing a short and giving rise to an ignition source. 

In order for the fire to have reached such intensity in the short time, the initial investigation found that the oxygen supply 
hose inside the drum had ruptured and fuelled the fire.  

Safety Flash 

  

 

The welding unit was rated to 800 amps which is in excess of the requirement for oxy-arc burning and exceeding the 500 
amps rating of the welding cable and connectors - information which onboard personnel were potentially unaware of. 

The member raised a company safety alert highlighting the fact that the welding machines were capable of delivering up to 
800 amps, and new signage was placed on the machines prohibiting use by non-authorised personnel.  Lower current welding 
machines will be procured to replace the over specified units. 

Members  are  reminded  of  the  importance  of  ensuring  plant  and  equipment  compatibility  and  of  working  within  the 
operational parameters set by equipment manufacturers and suppliers.  

 

 

