AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/16 

Safety Flash 

  June 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

The following five incidents all deal with equipment failure of one kind or another.  The first incident relates to 
another instance of parts falling from a crane – in this case, a steel sign.  This is not the first time this has happened 
and members may wish to review this and other similar incidents. 

The second incident covers high potential failure of the structure of a small boat during surveying operations.  The 
third incident informs members about the risks of metal corrosion in older equipment. 

The fourth (a near miss) relates to the discovery of missing parts in subsea lifting and rigging equipment.  The fifth 
relates to the risk of fires from sub-standard phone charging equipment. 

1  Dropped Object: Signage Dropped From Crane Boom 

A member has reported an incident in which a piece of metal fell from a crane boom.  The incident occurred on a 
vessel  whilst alongside  during the  testing of the luffing motors’ braking system  on  the main crane.   During this 
testing the crane boom made an uncontrolled descent into its crutch, resulting in a 60 kg steel sign falling 15m 
down to the deck. 

 

 

Investigation revealed that the sign was fixed by 4 x stitch welds, of which three were completely rusted away. 

The following immediate actions were taken: 

operations; 

  All Stop: The hydraulic tech contacted bridge and chief engineer to report the incident and stop associated 

  The area beneath the crane (starboard dock wall, main deck passageway) was barriered off; 

 
  Crew working nearby were asked to make safe any work and leave the job; 

  A dropped object inspection of the crane boom took place to search for further loose items; 

  A dropped object inspection on the starboard dock wall and fly jib platform was performed;  

  A formal investigation began. 

Initial recommendations – subject to completion of investigation – were: 

  Review standard operating procedures for testing the brakes of the cranes; 

  Review the associated Permit to Work requirements (e.g. further consideration of what areas nearby should be 

barriered off); 

Thorough inspection of all elements and parts of the crane (main, auxillary and signage) before further testing and 
use. 

Members will be aware that in recent times there have been a number of incidents reported in which objects have 
fallen from the crane itself.  This incident forms yet another timely reminder to redouble our efforts to check areas 
that might otherwise be overlooked in the search for potential dropped objects. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: crane, dropped): 

IMCA SF 04/11 – Incident 1 – Crane boom dropped object; 

IMCA SF 15/14 – Incident 1 – Dropped object near miss –unsecured plastic box fell from load being Lifted by 
mobile crane; 

IMCA SF 02/15 – Incident 1 – Dropped object near miss: falling crane block; 

IMCA SF 10/15 – Incident 1 – Near miss: dropped object fell from crane boom; 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 1 – High potential near miss: safe working load (swl) plate fell from crane auxiliary 
block; 

 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 2 – Dropped object near miss: small parts falling from crane rest. 

Members are also reminded of IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

2  High Potential Near Miss: Damage to Small Boat during Offshore Survey Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a small boat was damaged during offshore survey operations.  The 
incident occurred during offshore transit to port.  The boat experienced a ‘following wave’ that overtook it, causing 
the boat to drop into the trough of the next wave, causing the foredeck to partially detach from the hull. 

The Helmsman immediately stopped the  boat and turned the stern into the waves to reduce any further water 
ingress.  The crew activated the ‘emergency response plan’ and performed an immediate inspection of the damage.  
Due to the potential for further water ingress, the Helmsman altered course and the boat was routed to the nearest 
port in liaison with the local coastguard. 

 

 
Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

  The  foredeck  and  the  hull  section  was  insufficiently  bonded  together  when  the  boat  was  built  in  2011.    A 

detailed analysis indicated that: 
  Less than 10% of the bonding surfaces showed signs of aggravated rupture by splintering or de-lamination, 

indicating that they were incorrectly bonded at build stage 

  The GRP (glass-reinforced plastic or fibre-glass) bonding was likely to have been incorrectly performed due 

to the restricted space available in the foredeck 

  The vessel had undergone a competent and third party inspection that had concluded that no structural 

defects were identified in the GRP construction. 

The cause of the incident was found to be a material failure of the hull as a result of insufficient bonding during the 
build phase of the vessel.  Whilst the weather, as with most marine operations, was an influence, this was not a 
major contributing factor given that hull designs of this nature should be able to operate under the experienced 
conditions. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Plan and implement better QC for bonding processes during construction of these boats; 

  Planned regular Inspections for significant indicators (cracks in secondary internal bonding) to be included in 

maintenance routines; 

  This particular boat underwent additional bonding and stiffening processes and was subjected to both marine 

and authority assessments before it was returned to operations; 

  Further careful checking and verifying of the competence of third-party inspectors who carry out vessel surveys.  
Crews, owners, charterers and auditors need to be able to satisfy themselves that these surveys are carried out 
to the highest standard. 

Further  information  on  construction  standards  for  small  boats  can  be  found  at  www.seafish.org/industry-
support/marine-survey/construction-standards. 

3  Corrosion of Hollow Section Members on Offshore Drilling Structures 

IMCA’s attention has been brought to instances of potentially serious corrosion on certain types of derricks on jack 
up offshore drilling rigs.  During the periodical inspection of drilling structures, a significant structural integrity issue 
has been identified.  The derricks affected are mostly all 1.2 – 1.3m hook load or GNC derricks built in the early 
1980’s. 

The issue discovered is advanced corrosion of load bearing members within hollow section members on certain 
models of drilling derrick.  This corrosion on the derrick members has been shown to be serious enough to affect 
the performance and therefore the load bearing capacity of these derricks.  In the worst case scenario, there is the 
potential  for  member  failure  which  could  in  turn  overload  other  structural  members  or  create  a  significant 
structural failure and/or DROPS incident. 

 

 

 
Further information can be found here. 

Corrosion-related failure of materials as an immediate cause of near misses or even actual incidents is something 
that has come to the attention of IMCA on a number of occasions recently.  Members may wish to look into this, 
particularly where corrosion may be hidden, difficult to access or otherwise likely to be overlooked. 

4  Near Miss: Rigging Recovered with Missing Nut from Tri-Plate Shackle 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  rigging  was  recovered  to  deck  with  missing  parts.    The  incident 
occurred when a rigging composed of two tri-plates was recovered to the vessel deck, and crew noticed that a nut 
was missing from one of the shackles.  The installation rigging included two tri-plates, one in the lower section of 
the  rigging  arrangement  just  above  the  suction  pile,  and  the  second  one  on  the  upper  end  of  the  rigging 
arrangement connected to the crane’s auxiliary block.  The shackle from which the nut was missing was one of the 
three  installed  in  the  upper  tri-plate  which  was  used  to  transfer  the  pile  from  the  crane  auxiliary  block  to  the 
Abandonment & Recovery (A&R) winch when lowering the pile to the seabed. 

 

 

 

 

Showing cotter pins (split pins) not spread open as they ought to be.  These pins were 

loose and could be moved back and forth easily 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The cotter pin (split pin) was incorrectly installed (not opened out enough); 

  There was no thorough visual inspection of tri-plate shackles by rigging crews (onshore or offshore); 

  The tri-plate was secured on deck with shackles facing downward; 

  The pre-sail-away checklist did not include checks of tri-plate shackles; 

  The offshore rigging crew were unaware of observation following previous pile installation; 

  There was a lack of training of onshore rigging team provided for barge mobilization. 

The following root causes were identified: 

 
  Environment – rigging arrangement not allowing straightforward inspection of cotter pins; 

  People – lack of communication between onshore/offshore and project/vessel teams.  Onshore project team 
were aware of the prior observance of a similar hazard.  A presentation was developed and meeting held on 
shore but no evidence could be found that it was ever shared with the teams on board the vessel; 

  People – lack of attention/due care/poor work practice.  Lack of pre-lift check of shackles by riggers, and failure 

to fully check rigging prior to barge sail-away; 

  Organization – failure to vet the onshore rigging team supplied by co-contractor’s subcontractor. 

Our member took the following actions: 

 

Inspection of all rigging arrangements on the other piles; 

  Reviewed pre-sail-away checklist and integrated into it all specific checks such as nuts and securing cotter pins; 

  Updated the risk assessment and lift plan to reflect the hazards of missing/incorrectly installed pins in shackles; 

  Onshore and offshore riggers to check thoroughly the presence of securing cotter pins after installation and 

  Project team to ensure that subcontractor’s rigging teams are properly vetted for competency prior to future 

before lifting operations; 

barge mobilizations. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: missing, lifting): 

 

IMCA SF 02/15 – Incident 4 – Near miss: missing nut and split pin on shackle 

5  Mobile Phone Charger Failures 

Incident 1 

IMCA  brings  to  members’  attention  two  recent  incidents  relating  to  failures  of  charging  equipment  for  mobile 
phones and other small portable equipment using lithium batteries. 

A member has reported an incident in which a charging cable for a mobile phone was discovered smouldering.  A 
shore-based member of staff was at work at their work station when they noticed that their phone adaptor charger, 
which was plugged in and charging their phone, began smouldering.  The employee immediately turned off and 
unplugged the charger and reported the occurrence. 

On inspection of the phone charger, it was noticed that the charger cable was damaged and in an old and worn out 
condition which lead to it overheating. 

A summary of actions: 

  The  stop  work  policy  actually  worked:  The  adapter  was  immediately  unplugged  and  the  burned  cable  was 

removed from use, and the occurrence was immediately reported; 

 

 
  A safety stand down was conducted with office personnel to discuss the importance of being more attentive to 

the condition of electrical appliances; 

  A monthly office inspection schedule was established and implemented, emphasizing the checking of electrical 

equipment, fire detection equipment and fire-fighting equipment. 

Lessons Learnt: 

  The importance of checking the condition of personal electrical equipment; 

  Electrical hazards are all around us not just on the vessel but in the office as well.  The following points may be 

useful:  
  all electrical appliances being used should be genuine and in a good working condition 
  plug sockets and extension leads are to be used correctly and not overloaded 
  care should be taken when dealing with different styles of plugs and sockets from different countries 
  ensure all electrical appliances are switched off after use or before leaving the place of work 
  ensure all electrical appliances are clear from any liquid spillage 
  ensure all extension leads are tidy and do not constitute a trip or fall hazard 
 

if you notice or suspect any electrical hazard in the work place report it immediately. 

Incident 2 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  reported  a  small  fire  in  a 
crew member’s cabin on a vessel.  It was thought to have 
been caused by the overheating of a battery.  The crew 
member who was not in his cabin at the time, had left a 
power bank  (battery pack for charging small appliances) 
charging  and  unattended.    This  unit  appeared  to  be  a 
cheap unit purchased online. 

See here for details. 

Members  should  take  great  care  with  mains  battery 
chargers,  lithium  battery  ‘power  banks’  and  USB  cables 
that are not “OEM” (Original Equipment Manufacturer).  It 
is  particularly  important  to  ensure  that  USB  cables  are 
appropriate to safely handle the higher levels of current delivered by some modern chargers. 

Portable electrical equipment brought on board vessels should be checked and rated against the ships power supply 
by qualified personnel.  Electrical items should not be left charging, or on standby, in unoccupied spaces (such as 
cabins.) 

