AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/14 

Safety Flash 

  June 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  Serious Dropped Object Incidents  

A member has reported two serious dropped object incidents.  In the first, an object weighing 100kg was dropped 2.4m.  In 
the second, an object weighing 15.3kg fell 20m, struck a worker on the head and shoulders and caused a first aid injury. 

 

Incident 1: 

During a routine change out of the HOM (Hang Off Module) pads, a pad weighing 100kg was dropped 2.4m.  The pad landed 
on  the portable  access  steps  on  which  the  operations  technician  was  stood.    The  impact  caused  damage  to  the  steps  and 
caused the technician to lose his balance and fall over.  

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

  The female thread in the HOM pad assembly was corroded; 

  Due to its location the corrosion was not readily identifiable at the time the eye bolt was fitted; 

  Owing to the eyebolt having to pass through a lifting bracket the effective thread was reduced by 10mm. 

Eye-bolt 
through 
lifting plate reducing 
effective  thread  by 
10mm 

10mm lifting plate 

Thread 
inside  the 
pad  was  found  to 
be badly corroded 

Figure 1: Showing HOM (hang-off module) 

 

Figure 2: Showing damaged steps 

 

 
Our member took the following specific actions: 

  Redesign of the lifting device – three threaded bolts now used to secure the lifting brackets in position;  

  Weld type pad eyes will be fitted to all HOM pad lifting brackets; 

  All tapped holes to be checked and re-drilled and tapped the next size up if found to be worn; 

  Once all sizes are established, stainless steel grub screws will be purchased and will be greased and fitted to all tapped 

lifting holes on HOM pads to help eliminate corrosion. 

Incident 2: 

On  a  pipelay  vessel,  a  side  roller  guide  for  the  track  chains  fell  from  the  upper  tensioner  onto  the  protection  roof  of  the 
lower  workstation,  before  administering  a  glancing  blow  to  a  rigger,  resulting  in  first  aid  treatment.    The  object  weighed 
15.3kg and fell 20m.  

Figure 3: Side roller guide 

Figure 4: Pipelay tower 

 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  The retaining bolts on the bearing rail had been sheared; 

  The upper section had only one bolt in place. 

All members are encouraged to check carefully all equipment used at height for: 

  Corrosion; 

 

Insufficient security of bolts and tensioners. 

These incidents highlight the need for constant vigilance for dropped objects.  The re-occurrence of dropped object incidents 
is evidence that dropped objects are still harming and have the potential to kill.  IMCA members have reported a number of 
dropped object incidents already this year. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: dropped, corrosion): 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 09/07 Incident 3 Lifting rigging on “Frog” personnel transfer capsule  
http://www.imca-int.com/media/50013/imcasf09-07.pdf 

IMCA SF 04/10 Incident 2 Falling object 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/48886/imcasf04-10.pdf  

IMCA SF 01/12 Incident 5 Dropped Object Injury Resulting from Failure Caused by Corrosion 
http://www.bsee.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Safety-Alerts/SA_298-pdf.aspx  

2  LTI: Serious Hand Injury – Caught in the Bight 

A member has reported an incident in which a seaman sustained serious injuries to his hand resulting in the loss of his little 
finger.    The  incident  occurred  during  when  the  vessel  was  engaged  in  the  inter-field  transfer  of  personnel  and  equipment.  
The vessel proceeded to an unfamiliar platform and disembarked five personnel during rising seas.   Two personnel declined 

 
to transfer deeming the sea state unsafe for transfer operations, and the vessel was manoeuvred away to standby.  Later that 
afternoon the vessel was instructed to pick up the five passengers from the platform.  The weather had deteriorated further, 
with 3m swells and wind speeds of up to 15 knots, and the master deemed it unsafe to transfer passengers.  

However,  a  suggestion  was  made  to  transfer  the  baggage  via  heaving  line,  to  which  the  master  agreed.    The  injured  party 
passed the vessel’s heaving line across to the platform personnel who ran the heaving line up to the middle platform, securing 
the midsection to a railing.  Platform personnel then lowered the first two bags one at a time to the vessel.   The third and 
fourth  bags  were  simultaneously  lowered  down  to  the  crew  boat  via  both  ends  of  the  heaving  line.    The  injured  party 
received one bag on the port side and the 2nd Officer received the second bag on the starboard side.  Both proceeded to 
untie the knots at each end of the rope.   

As the injured party was untying the line, the vessel took a sudden dip due to the high swells.   He could not retract his left 
hand fast enough and three of his fingers were caught in the bight of the knot when the heaving line suddenly tensioned.  The 
injured  person  pushed  against  the  stern  deck  railing  to  prevent  being  pulled  overboard.    Subsequently  the  heaving  line 
severed his little finger and lacerated the ring and middle fingers.  The rope was finally cut and removed from his finger after 
crew fetched a knife from the accommodation.   

The casualty was medivaced to shore hospital four hours later but his finger could not be saved. 

 

 

Figure 5: Showing how fingers were caught in the bight (reconstruction) 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  This was the first time this method of baggage transfer had been used by any of the crew.  It was initiated on the spur of 

the moment, without any thought, risk assessment or planning – there was no Management of Change; 

  The rope was secured to the platform in such a way that it could not easily be released or slackened; 

  The  platform  crew  were  inexperienced  at  tying  appropriate  knots  and  tied  excessive  knots  in  the  small  diameter 

polypropylene rope which were difficult and time consuming to untie; 

  To speed up the transfer process two bags were lowered on each end of the secured heaving line, dividing the attention 

of the deck crew.  

Our member learnt the following lessons: 

  Don’t be tolerant of unacceptable risk; 

  Always ensure operational risks are identified and assessed prior to starting operations; 

  Always be mindful of the impact of changing customary methods of routine operations; 

  Always ensure operations are well planned, communicated and supervised; 

 
  Don’t give in to external pressure to work beyond safe working limits, always exercise your right to stop work. 

Finger and hand injuries are amongst the most common safety flashes reported. See the following typical example: 

 

IMCA SF 04/12 Incident 1 Lacerated finger during rigging operations 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/48717/imcasf04-12.pdf  

However, incidents referring specifically to the consequences of being “caught in the bight” are rarer.  Members may wish to 
refer to the following similar incidents (key words: crush, injury, rope, bight): 

IMCA SF 05/06 Incident 2 Hand injury sustained by diver 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/50063/imcasf05-06.pdf  

IMCA SF 13/12 Incident 3 LTI: Serious Hand Injury during Subsea Lifting Operations 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/96685/imcasf13-12.pdf  

3  First Aid Incident During at Sea Fuel Transfer – Mooring Lines 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which  two crewmen were injured 
by being hit by mooring lines under tension during at sea fuel transfer.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.23.pdf  

Mooring safety is topical and members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: mooring, tension): 

IMCA SF 02/08 Incident 1 Finger Injury Whilst Casting Off Towing Line 
www.imca-int.com/media/49897/imcasf02-08.pdf  

IMCA SF 04/09 Incident 3 Mooring incidents (a document from the UK P&I Club) 
www.imca-int.com/media/49007/imcasf04-09.pdf  

IMCA SF 07/10 Incident 2 Crewman Fatally Injured During Mooring Operations 
www.imca-int.com/media/48911/imcasf07-10.pdf 

4  Vessel Blackout During Close Standby 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which  there was a vessel blackout 
during close standby.  Investigation revealed that blocked fuel filters were part of the cause.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.15.pdf  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar event (key word: blackout): 

 

IMCA SF 13/08 Incident 1 Faulty Governors 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/49946/imcasf13-08.pdf  

5  Pressure Vessel Systems - Response to Fatal Accident 

The  Australian  Marine  Safety  Authority  (AMSA)  has  published  information  about  a  fatal  accident  involving  pressure  vessel 
systems.    A  fatality  occurred  when  the  observation  glass  of  a  main  compressed  air  receiver  drainage  pot  failed 
catastrophically while a ship’s engineer was draining accumulated water (condensate) from the ship’s main air reservoir.  

Further information can be found at https://apps.amsa.gov.au/MOReview/Attachment/ShowAttachment/589 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: pressure, fatality) 

IMCA SF 08/03 Incident 2 Fatality – Pressure Build-Up leading to Sudden Release of Mechanical Plug 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/50855/imcasf08-03.pdf  

IMCA SF 18/09 Incident 1 Fatality During Pressure Test 
www.imca-int.com/media/49884/imcasf18-09.pdf  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

