AB 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/13 

Safety Flash 

 June 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  High Potential Near Miss – Lifting Equipment Failure  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  there  was  a  potentially  catastrophic  failure  of  a  lifting  sling.  The  incident 
occurred during repair and maintenance operations for a trenching ROV, when the trencher was being lifted onto axle stands 
to assist with on-going maintenance. The crew planned the lift using a single sling, as standard lifting strops were missing. The 
single  sling  was  placed  around  the  box  section  and  it  was  identified  that  the  lift  point  had  a  sharp  edge  which  could  have 
damaged  the  lifting  sling.  It  was  decided  to  pad  the  sharp  edge  with  wadding  to  prevent  damage  to  the  sling.  The  crane 
started  to  take  the  weight  of  the  trencher,  and  when  it  reached  approximately  18T  of  tension,  the  sling  failed.  Upon 
inspection, it was found that the sharp edge identified had cut through the padding and sliced the sling causing it to part under 
load. No damage occurred as the trencher was never lifted off the ground. 

 

 

 

 

Figure: Showing initial lifting point arrangement used during 

Figure: Showing re-assessed lifting point arrangement used after 

incident 

incident 

Our member identified the following immediate causes:  

 

Inadequate planning – other lift points were available to complete the lift without the sharp edge affecting the lift; 

  No management of change or ‘stop the job’ completed – the ‘stop the job’ process should have been implemented as 

soon as the missing strops were identified; 

 

Planned method continued despite identification of sharp edge  – crew assumed that padding the sharp edge would be 
sufficient to complete the lift safely; 

  No specific planned method was identified for completion of the lifts – planning was completed at site as requirements 

Our member identified the following root causes:  

 

Inadequate equipment available  
-  There was insufficient lifting equipment to complete the assigned tasks, leaving the crew to borrow equipment from 

elsewhere; the job should have been stopped in this context; 

developed. 

 

 
 

- 
- 
- 

- 

Poor pre-work planning  

There was no lift plan developed before arrival at site; 
Correct lift points were not identified;  
Lift plan was developed at site developed with available rigging in mind, rather than correct lift points in mind. 

 

Lack of situational awareness  

All aspects of health and safety planning were completed, as required with regards to lift plans, job safety analysis and 
tool-box talk; however, an assumption was made regarding the application of padding around the sharp edge. 

The following lessons were learnt:  

 

Ensure sufficient and appropriate lifting equipment is always available; 

  Reiterate importance of ‘stop the job’ and management of change processes; 

 

Ensure  lift  planning  is  conducted  with  reference  to  correct  and  safe  lifting,  rather  than  “making  do”  with  what  is 
available on site; 

  Members may wish to refer to IMCA SEL 019 - Guidelines for lifting operations for further information.  

2  Loading and Securing of Cargo 

A  member  has  highlighted  two  recent  occasions  in  which  containers  and  vehicles  were  inappropriately  loaded  and 
transported  with  their  contents  unsecured,  which  resulted  in  unnecessary  manual  handling  of  cargo.  Unsafe  packing  of 
containers  and  loading  of  vehicles  is  something  that  still  occurs.  The  potential  exists  for  injury,  environmental  impact  or 
equipment damage caused by unsecured cargo and/or not loading vehicles correctly. 

  

  

 

Figures: Showing items loaded directly onto a trailer with no pallets (making further manual handling by yard crew necessary) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure: Equipment packed into a container unsecured 

 

 The following simple suggestions may be of use to members: 

Place items being shipped in suitable containers, giving consideration to the possible cargo handling capabilities of those 
receiving the load (i.e. forklift availability, access, container type); 

Ensure loads are distributed in a balanced and even way;  

Place heavier items at the bottom with lighter items on top – do not place heavy cargo on top of fragile cargo; 

  Use packing to prevent damage between items of cargo; 

 

Lash down (and wedge if necessary) cargo, to prevent movement in transit; 

  Do not pack sharp items next to soft skinned drums; 

  Certain chemicals and materials, when combined (possibly through transit damage), can become toxic, highly flammable 

or explosive – it is imperative that such materials are kept apart; 

Ensure the doors and locking mechanisms are secure with locking device attached (including secondary securing device) 
and, where applicable, use door safety nets; 

Ensure no loose items have been left on the roof of the CCU (Cargo Carrying Unit) or container; 

Loading  of  cargo  should  be  properly  planned  and  implemented,  to  facilitate  the  ease  of  unloading  on  arrival  at  the 
destination; 

  Members may wish to refer to: 

International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code -  www.imo.org/blast/mainframe.asp?topic_id=158  

- 
-  Oil  &  Gas  UK  Guidelines  for  the  Safe  Packing  &  Handling  of  Cargo  to  and  from  Offshore  Locations  -  

http://info.ogp.org.uk/liftingandhoisting/RPR/OilAndGasUKPacking.pdf.   

3  Use of Portable Electrical Deck Equipment 

A member has highlighted some recent examples of portable electrical deck equipment being used with incorrect plugs and 
sockets. This safety flash serves to bring to members’ attention the issue of plugs and sockets for electrical equipment used in 
the outdoor marine environment. 

During routine portable appliance testing, it was found that plugs and sockets on portable electrical equipment used in the 
deck environment had an IP44 ingress and integrity rating, which is not sufficient for use on the back deck or an open deck 
marine environment. Also, it was found that 9” grinders with a rating of 2000W and 19A had their 32A plugs removed and 
16A plugs fitted instead, with subsequent potential for overheating, burns or electric shock. 

 

 

Figure: 110v/2000W/19A 9” grinder with 32amp IP67 plug and the IP44 16amp plug removed. 

 

 The following actions were recommended: 

 

Socket  outlets,  appliance  inlets  and  portable  equipment  operated  in  an  open  marine  environment  should  have  a 
minimum  IP  rating  of  IP56;  alternatively  the  socket  should  be  located  inside  an  enclosure  with  a  minimum  ingress 
integrity rating of IP56; 

  Regular checks should be made of hand tools and extension leads, to ensure portable equipment and extension leads to 
be used on the back deck are fitted with suitable IP 56 plugs and sockets, (IEC plugs and sockets are usually rated IP44 
or IP67; the more robust IP67 ones should be used); 

 

 

 

Incorrect  equipment  should  either  be  removed  from  use  and  fitted  with  the  correctly  rated  plugs/sockets,  or 
substituted with equipment that is correctly rated (i.e. the appliance in use may have been taken from a workshop to be 
used on the open deck, the IP rating is adequate for indoors, but not outdoors); 

Ensure personnel  are  fully  aware  and  informed  with  regard  to  the  appliance  voltage  and  load  rating  current,  size  and 
type  of  plug  fitted,  condition  of  flex/cable,  and  same  for  any  extension  leads,  including  plug  and  socket  and  the  fixed 
socket outlet;  

Ensure  that  personnel  always  check  and  inspect  equipment  before  use,  to  ensure  the  equipment  is  fit  for  use  and 
purpose. All deficient equipment should be removed from use and either repaired or disposed of; 

  Check  and  ensure  that  deck  power  sockets  and  circuits  are  fitted  with  correctly  rated  plugs  and  sockets,  or 

swap/replace appliances with equipment that is fit for purpose; 

  Members may wish to refer to IMCA’s handy pocket card IMCA SPC 22 - Electrical Hazards. 

4  Surge Protective Devices Onboard Vessels 

The  United  States  Coast  Guard  (USCG)  published  in  April  this  year  a  Marine  Safety  Alert  on  surge  protective  devices. 
Subsequently, an updated and corrected version of this information was made available as Marine Safety Alert 03-13b. The 
alert covers the risk of fire arising from the misuse of certain voltage surge protective devices used in mains electric circuitry 
onboard  vessels.  A  marine  casualty  investigation  of  two  separate  stateroom  fires  onboard  a  US  flagged  container  ship 
revealed that the sources of the fires were attributed to the use of surge protective devices plugged into a lighting circuit. 

Further information is available from www.uscg.mil/tvncoe/Documents/safetyalerts/SurgeProtectiveDevices.pdf  

 
5  Fuel Oil Bunkering Safety 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  a  safety  issue  that  occurred  during  fuel  oil 
bunkering.  A  vessel  had  prepared  to  take  fuel  oil  on  board,  all  precautions  were  in  place  and  the  checklist  had  been 
completed correctly and the crew had completed a toolbox talk. During bunkering, a quantity of fuel oil was spilled into the 
engine room.   

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.18.pdf  

 

