Safety Flash 

AB

 

 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/08 Rev. 1 

June 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

This flash has been reissued to provide additional guidance in respect of item 3 – GPS Antenna Problems 

1  Unsecured Object Fell and Injured Crewman 

During routine offshore operations, a piece of unsecured grillage stowed on deck toppled and struck a member of the deck 
crew  on  the  foot.    The  impact  was  severe  and  caused  multiple  fractures  to  the  metatarsal  bones  of  his  foot  and  serious 
lacerations.  The injured crew member was medivaced to a local hospital where he is currently being treated. 

At the time of the incident the weather was flat calm and the vessel was in transit.  The deck crew was involved in setting up 
a  rigging  arrangement  on  the  over-boarding  chute  whilst  technicians  were  carrying  out  fault-finding  on  other  equipment.  
Four members of the deck crew were on their way to collect rigging equipment from the rigging container.  To reach the 
container the crew had to pass between a deck tugger winch and a heavy piece of grating which had been removed from the 
top  of  the  equipment  being  investigated  by  the  technicians.    This  piece  of  grating  was  stowed  upright  against  the  plough 
guards on deck. 

Whilst passing between the tugger and the plough guard the grating was disturbed and fell, striking the foot of the injured 
party.  The grating was fitted with fixing lugs, one of which severely impacted the foot, penetrating the safety boot and caused 
the injuries. 

Fixing lug 

Grating and 
approximate 
positions of crew 
at the time 

This incident occurred during routine deck activities when the level of hazard awareness and attention to detail was perhaps 
not as high as it would be when the vessel was fully operational on project construction work.  This highlights the need for 
the  same  level  of  awareness,  attention  to  detail  and  communications  during  routine  work  as  there  is  during  project 
construction operations. 

The following points were noted: 

♦  The grating was an obvious obstruction and partly blocked a frequently used access route to storage and working areas; 

♦ 

It was left completely unsecured and incorrectly stowed; 

 

 

injured party; 

♦  Three people attempted to walk round the obstruction without identifying the potential hazard – the fourth became the 

♦  An obvious hazard went unchecked and subsequently caused an accident. 

2  Dry Suit Inflation Installation on to a KM 37 Helmet 

The practice of installing a dry suit inflation whip with modified fittings onto a KM 37 side block has been reported to IMCA. 

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems Inc. has advised the following. 

 

♦  The modification to the side block assembly of the KM 37, shown in the photograph above, is not recommended; 

♦  The leverage on the brass fitting is extremely high giving a high potential for breakage; 

♦  The fitting at the bottom of the side block is a 3/8" straight thread fitting with an O-ring seal which is not designed to 

sustain this kind of leverage. 

Members are reminded that an in-line valve is not deemed necessary by the helmet manufacturer, as long as a good quality 
and suitably approved inflator hose is used or the KMDSI restrictor adapter PN# 555-210. 

3  GPS Antenna Problems – updated 

A member has reported a serious failure of a vessel’s GPS positioning equipment.  When approaching the work area, which 
was close to the shore, the vessel experienced a complete failure of all its GPS receivers (eight receivers from four different 
manufacturers/suppliers). 

Following extensive fault-finding which isolated the problem to the area of the vessel bridge, it was discovered that one GPS 
unit was causing the failure of all the other units.  The receiving antenna for the unit had failed and had become a transmitter, 
the signal from which subsequently blocked all the other GPS receivers mounted nearby.  The close proximity (<1m) of this 
damaged  antenna  unit  to  two  other  GPS  antenna  units  may  also  have  caused  damage  to  the  internal  electronics  of  these 
units. 

Members  are  warned  to  be  aware  of  the  potential  hazard  posed  by  a  faulty  GPS  antenna  and  that  all  GPS  antennae  be 
separated by at least two metres where possible.  It is recommended that when selecting the mounting location and installing global 
navigation satellite system (GNSS) antennae, guidance is taken from the system manufacturer with regard to safe operating distance 
from  other  equipment  and  with  special  attention  given  to  transmit/receive  devices.    Care  should  also  be  taken  in  the  selection  of 
appropriate  cabling  and  antennae  and  to  the  shielding  and  grounding  required  for  these  systems.    A regular  inspection  and 
maintenance schedule is also recommended, with periodic replacement of cables. 

4  Fire Watches for Surface Welding and Burning Operations 

A member has reported a number of incidents during welding and burning operations which had the potential to result in 
injury to personnel or damage to equipment or vessels. 

Members are urged to consider the following fire watch precautions when carrying out hot work operations: 

♦  A suitably competent Fire Watch should be designated; 

♦  The Fire Watch should be provided with suitable fire fighting and safety equipment dependent on the type and area of 

♦  The Fire Watch should be shown the area of operation and all adjacent areas; 

♦  The Fire Watch should be made familiar with all fixed and temporary fire fighting and safety equipment in the immediate 

operations; 

and adjacent areas; 

♦ 

It is of particular importance that the Fire Watch is provided with clear and unambiguous instructions on the procedure 
to raise the alarm in the event of a fire.  This may require the Fire Watch to be made familiar with the nearest active fire 
alarm activation point and be provided with direct communications to the bridge; 

♦  The  immediate  and  adjacent  areas  should  be  inspected  prior  to  welding  or  burning  operations  to  ensure  that  good 
housekeeping standards are in force.  Clean and tidy areas in the vicinity of the work areas may help to avoid any fire 
related incidents; 

The  Fire  Watch  should  be  in  place  prior  to  commencement  and  throughout  the  duration  of  the  welding  or  burning 
operations.  The Fire Watch should remain in force on completion of the operations until all involved are reasonably satisfied 
that the requirement for a full time watch can be dispensed with. 

 

 

