AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 18/08 

Safety Flash 

December 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Mini Transponder Falling from Crane Wire to Deck 

A member has reported an incident in which a mini transponder attached to the crane wire came loose and fell 20m to the 
deck. 

A 35m long pennant wire with a guide anchor in the end was being used to open/close hatches on templates.  After closing 
hatches the wire was recovered to deck.  A mini transponder was attached to the crane wire just above the crane hook, 
with two hose clamps.  Due to the length of the forerunner the crane had to lift it as high as possible and the wire remaining 
outside the side of the ship had to be manhandled over the rail.  Due to a failing end stop mechanism the crane was hoisted 
too far and the mini transponder was torn off the crane wire and fell to the deck, narrowly missing two members of the 
crew who were under the crane ready to manhandle the wire end in on to the deck.  There were no injuries. 

Transponder bracket design 

 

The following points were noted: 

  Deck personnel should not have been under the load or in the lifting area; 

  Deck personnel should be reminded to always wait for a signal from the crane driver before moving into a lifting area; 

  The practice of attaching the transponder to the crane wire should be identified as a risk and discussed appropriately at 

toolbox meetings beforehand; 

  The faulty end stop mechanism on the crane was repaired – as this mechanism was the only barrier preventing the wire 
from being hoisted too far, the electrical switches on the end stop mechanism were replaced with switches of a better 
quality; 

  A formal procedure was implemented for safely attaching the transponder to the crane wire; 

  A purpose-designed transponder bracket was designed and fabricated for fastening these to the crane wire, such that the 

transponder itself cannot hit the end stop block. 

 

2  Failure of Pipe Handling System Causes Injuries and Fatalities 

A member has reported an incident in which the failure of a J-lay pipe-handling system caused two pipes to be dropped, one 
of which caused injuries to eight people, four of whom died as a result.  During pipe-laying operations, a system failure in the 
hydraulic pipe handling system of the J-lay tower (JLT) caused two quadruple joints being handled at the same time in two 
different  areas  of  the  tower  to  drop  suddenly.    Each  piece  of  pipe  was  50m  long  with  a  diameter  of  24”  and  weighed 
approximately 20 tons. 

Just prior to the incident the pipe-laying operation was stopped.  Operators reported a system failure and that the hydraulic 
power  had  been  lost.    Such  an  occurrence  was  not  particularly  unusual  and,  in  line  with  company  procedures,  this  was 
investigated immediately.  A team of technicians led by the chief electrician tried without success to resolve the problems.  
After these attempts, a more in-depth analysis was made.  It was decided, on the basis of input from the system diagnostics, 
to perform a memory reset.  Following this the system appeared to be running correctly.  This was the first time that a full 
memory reset was requested by the internal diagnostics of the control system during a project operational phase. 

Only after all indications that everything was in order and all systems were up and running again was the instruction given to 
the operator to restart the hydraulic packs.  As soon as the hydraulic power packs were started, a loud bang was heard along 
with  the  noise  of  the  hydraulic  systems.    One  quadruple  joint  within  the  J-lay  tower,  held  by  the  transfer  system,  was 
released and fell about a metre to the upper welding deck.  At the same time, the quadruple joint held by the pipe elevator at 
the top of the J-lay tower was also released from its clamps and the hydraulic safety stop swung away, allowing the pipe to fall 
the full height of the tower, smashing through the access platform located outside the non-destructive testing/coating station 
to the lower deck below. 

All the people who were injured had been on the access platform which was destroyed.  The force of impact caused some of 
the injured persons to fall down on to the lower deck at the base of the pipe-lay tower and some to be thrown overboard. 

Eight persons were injured, two seriously and two slightly.  Four of the injured persons died as a result of their injuries. 

 
J-lay tower 

 

The primary causes of the incident were found to be: 

  Sudden release of the two quadruple joints was caused by a failure in conceptual design of the control system software.  
The program relevant to the JLT initialising instruction was pre-loaded in the erasable programmable read-only memory 
(EPROM)  of  the  programmable  logic  controller  (PLC)  with  the  instruction  to  open  all  clamps.    Members  are 

recommended to investigate the possibility that this could happen to the PLC-based control systems on 
equipment on their vessels. 

  The  unnecessary  presence  and  uncontrolled  access  of  working  personnel  on  to  the  access  platform  destroyed  by  the 

falling pipe exposed personnel to suspended load/dropped object hazard. 

Pipe held in the clamps 

Pipe and wreckage after the fall 

 

 

Following investigation of the incident, a number of corrective actions were put in place by the company: 

  The first primary cause was resolved with the removal of the EPROM memories from the system; 

  The second primary cause has been addressed by a revision of the vessel and JLT working methodologies; pipe handling 
activities  have  been  reconsidered  through  a  dropped  object  philosophy  in  order  to  identify  mechanical  and  electrical 
barriers, additional controls, and new set of operational procedures; 

  Electrical controls: 

  Mechanical controls: 

– 
– 

– 

– 

– 

a number of clamp opening operations were prevented by adding electrical circuit breakers 
all critical sequences will be called by PLC and must be confirmed by operator via electrical push buttons; 

different systems have been and will be implemented to prevent the vertical pipe drop in any section of the JLT, to 
restrain lateral pipe movement and fall and to secure the pipe until the internal line up is completed in the upper 
welding station 
an  additional  public  address  system  was  installed  for  use during  quadruple joint loader  lift,  and  audible  and  visible 
alarms for elevator movements 
a  safety  net  was  installed  underneath  the  J-Lay  tower  platforms  to  guarantee  protection  against  persons  falling 
overboard; 

  Procedures were revised in light of the incident, with the following points highlighted: 
all pipe handling activities are to be considered as working under suspended loads 
the immediate area around the JLT is restricted to essential personnel only 
transit and from the JLT to be controlled by dedicated watchmen 
no personnel at all allowed in certain areas during J-lay operations. 

– 
– 
– 
– 

 

 

