SAFETY FLASH 

 September 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 20/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

Theme: Dropped Objects 

This safety flash focusses on a number of dropped object incidents.  In the first we see how pro-active intervention 
prevented a worse outcome.  The second incident covers high potential dropped pipe incidents.  We then look at 
dropped object incidents arising from corrosion failures, and dropped objects arising from failure to properly plan 
and prepare the job.  The final incident covers a dropped object from lifted cargo. 

1  Pro-Active Intervention Prevented High Potential Dropped Object 

What happened? 

During  inspection  of  the  vessel  crane,  it was  noted 
that  a  steel  spacer  plate  had  become  partially 
detached due to corrosion forming behind the plate.  
The  plate  had  been  installed  by  the  manufacturer 
during  the  crane  installation  but  had  not  been 
removed  as  intended.    On  touching  the  spacer,  it 
detached completely but was prevented from falling. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The  spacer  plate  had  been  present  since  original 
vessel/crane  build.    It  weighed  1.5kg  and  had  the 
potential to fall 40 meters to deck.  The only means of attachment for the steel plate to the structure was by tack 
welding.  This was an accepted form of attachment by the manufacturer for temporary use, but not for permanent 
equipment. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Be vigilant during dropped object reviews for items with similar method of attachment i.e. tack welded; 

  Ensure that any identified items are securely attached; 

  Report any incidents of non-continuous welding and obtain guidance on corrective actions; 

 

If required, adjust maintenance actions to monitor for corrosion. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident 

  Crane Boom dropped object (an object fell from a crane as a direct result of a failed tack weld) 

 
2  Dropped Pipe Incidents with Potentially Fatal Consequences 

What happened? 

During line pipe load out operations, three high potential near miss incidents occurred involving quayside crane 
lifting operations.  All of the incidents had the potential for fatal consequences from line of fire situations.  Two of 
the incidents resulted from the line pipe being dropped from the quayside storage positions, and the third as a 
result of line pipe contact with the ship’s hold bulkhead which could have caused the pipe to drop. 

In  all  of  the  incidents,  site  activities  were  being 
directly  supervised  and  controlled  by  our 
member’s  subcontracted  line  pipe  supplier.    The 
operations involved a chartered heavy lift vessel, 
subcontracted  by  the 
line  pipe  supplier,  to 
undertake the pipe load out activities. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Our member noted the following: 

  There  was  no  work  instruction  available  to 
detail  the  task  and  process  of  securing  and 
lifting pipe from the quayside into the hold of 
the vessel;  

  There  was  no  requirement  within  the  line  pipe  supplier’s  management  system  to  verify  that  their 
subcontractors executing the  pipe  load out  understood and were experienced in the task,  nor to verify the 
training and competency of those subcontractors; 

  The communication process between the banksman and crane operator was not clearly understood (there was 

  The crane operator found it hard to see the banksman during the lifting operation, yet continued the lifting 

  The pre-job briefing did not cover all of the tasks to be conducted; 

  There was a lack of experienced supervision at all stages of the pipe load out activities; 

  The quayside slewing crane used was not as suitable for the task as the gantry crane, which was not always 

no documented process); 

operation; 

available for use. 

What lessons were learned? 

 

In evaluation of potential suppliers: 
  a focus should be placed on the high-risk activities that bidders are proposing to subcontract out 
  do not assume that suppliers are knowledgeable and experienced in all aspects of their contract. 

Members may wish to refer to the following IMCA Guidance: 

  Guidelines for lifting operations (IMCA SEL 019) 

  Guidance on safety in shipyards (IMCA HSSE 032) 

3  Dropped Object: Crane Floodlight 

What happened? 

A  floodlight  fell  from  its  position  on  the  knuckle  boom  of  the  vessel’s  crane.    The  floodlight  arrangement  was 
supported on a stainless steel bracket, comprising a bar and attachment plate that is bolted to the knuckle boom 
head.  This arrangement allowed the floodlight to swivel and illuminate the load area. 

 
What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The weld between the bar and the attachment plate failed due to the 
poor quality of the weld, which upon inspection revealed undercut, 
poor penetration and overdressing, resulting in a minimal fusion area 
which  was  insufficient  to  withstand  vibration  and  exposure  in  the 
marine environment. 

The underlying causes were found to be: 

Inadequate engineering; 

 

 

Inadequate  QC/monitoring  of  design  and  build  at  point  of 
fabrication (crane manufacturer). 

What actions were taken? 

The  floodlight  was  restored  to  its  original  position,  with  a  security 
chain installed as a retrofit attachment. 

Members may wish to review the following 

  Serious dropped object incidents [arising from corrosion] 

  Crane boom dropped object [failure of tack weld] 

  Galvanic  Corrosion  causes  dropped  object  –  satellite  dome  fell 

from mast 

4 

Two Serious Dropped Object Near Misses 

Incident 1 

A light and fitting on a third-party ship, weighing 8kg, fell 20 metres 
to the deck narrowly missing one of the crew members.  The light 
was fitted to a post which had previously been identified as heavily 
corroded. 

Findings:  the  corroded  item  had  previously  been  identified  by  the 
ship owners, but no corrective action was taken to secure the light 
and  remedy  the  situation.    Subsequent  inspection  by our member 
identified other items at risk of falling. 

Incident 2 

A  2.8kg  steel  pin  fell  16  metres  to  the  deck.    The  area  immediately 
below the drop area had barriers set, however if the pin had hit the 
structure and was deflected it could have endangered the deck crew.  

Findings: the task was not planned, or risk assessed correctly: 

  The removed pin was placed on the tower structure instead of in a 

scaffold clamp type basket; 

  The rigger was unfamiliar with the task and was not made aware of 

the required rules when working at height; 

Two further dropped object cases have been reported recently, highlighting the extreme danger and potential for 
fatalities. 

 
  Tools in use by the work team did not have the required lanyards and could have also fallen to the deck. 

What lessons were learned?  

Our member recommended: 

or rectified; 

  Outstanding defects that pose a risk of dropped objects should be categorised as dangerous and either removed 

  Worksite management should ensure that only the correct secured tools are used when working at height; 

  Tools used at height should be fitted with the appropriate securing devices to prevent them falling; 

  Ensure that all work at height is subject to a specific risk assessment which addresses the potential for dropped 

tools and work equipment, and identifies the controls to prevent this happening; 

  Barriers under towers should be set at a sufficient distance considering the possibility of items deflecting off 

any structures; 

  Prior to third-party vessels being taken on hire, evidence should be produced by the owner to prove that there 
has been a DROPS survey conducted,  and a regime  is in place to inspect, maintain and correct  any defects 
affecting the security of equipment at height. 

DROPS is a key safety focus.  For more information on DROPS visit http://www.dropsonline.org/resources-and-
guidance/poster-selection/, for industry guidance, posters, presentations and good practice hints and tips. 

Members may wish to refer to the following: 

  Working at height (video) 

  Avoiding dropped objects (video) 

  Technip DROPS (video) 

  Saipem DROPS – choice not chance (video) 

  High potential dropped object (2014) 

  Near miss: dropped object (2012) 

  Near miss dropped object: protector plate drops from crane (2015) 

5  Dropped Object: First Aid Injury During ROV Maintenance 

What happened? 

A tooling tray guide arm fell from an ROV skid rail slot and hit an ROV technician’s torso.  He was beneath the ROV 
disconnecting the securing pin.    Two further technicians had pulled out  the  tooling tray to allow  access for the 
injured person to clear himself from underneath.  While doing so, the guide arm dropped from the ROV skid rail 
onto the ROV technician underneath.  The estimated weight of the tooling tray was 68 Kg.  He was taken to the 
local clinic as a precaution for a check-up, as the vessel was in port at the time of the incident. 

 

Incident scene 

 

 
Tooling tray guide arm that made 

 
Additional view of guide arm 

contact with the IP 

What went wrong? 

  There was a requirement to remove the tooling tray before the next project; 

  The technician was required to go underneath to disconnect the securing pin from the hydraulic cylinder that 

connects the tooling tray to the ROV skid; 

  The skid was removed whilst he was underneath, and it fell onto him causing injury; 

  The risk assessment performed was not task specific. 

What were the causes? 

  There was a lack of communication and poor risk perception demonstrated by the ROV technicians; 

  The mechanism was not designed to be easily or safely removed. 

What lessons were learned? 

  There is a need for the attachment design for the clevis pin 
to  be  in  a  position  that  allows  for  access  from  the  main 
deck in front of the ROV; removing the need for personnel 
to be underneath during removal; 

  There  needs  to  be  higher  hazard/risk  perception  for 

routine tasks. 

What actions were taken? 

 

Improved the design (see image) eliminating the need for 
working underneath. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  High potential near miss: incorrectly secured overhead equipment 

 

LTI as a result of load dropped from lifting magnet 

  Near miss: diver working under suspended load 
 

 

 
6  Potential Dropped Objects in Frame Pockets 

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published Safety Alert 18-20 on Potential Dropped Objects in Frame Pockets.  
When preparing a heavy lift to be discharged from an offshore supply vessel to an offshore installation, the vessel's 
AB's were carrying out final checks, which included checks for any potential dropped objects.  During these checks, 
they discovered some debris within the frame pocket.  The items were estimated to weigh approximately 1kg. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Cargo checks onshore failed to spot the items before the lift had been loaded onto the PSV.  This was apparently 
due to the lift frame positioning on the trailer which may have hampered the checks at the gantry. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  The  potential  dropped  objects  were  removed  from  the  pocket  and  the  lift  was  safely  and  successfully 

  This alert highlights the importance of final checks on all lifts prior to discharge offshore even though there had 

discharged to the offshore installation; 

been previous checks onshore. 

The full MSF safety alert can be found here. 

The MSF notes that further information and guidance on the checking of cargo items for potential dropped objects 
can be found in ‘Best Practice for the Safe Packing & Handling of Cargo to & from Offshore Locations’ available at 
www.onshoreoffshorecargo.com. 

Members may wish to refer to the following: 

  Saipem DROPS – choice not chance (video) 

  Technip DROPS (video) 

  Dropped object awareness (MSF, 2016) 

  Dropped object incidents (2014) 

Dropped objects or potential dropped objects from cargo are a frequent cause of incidents. Users of IMCA Safety 
Flashes  can  search  the  IMCA  Safety  Flash  database  themselves  using  any  search  word.  Please  browse  to 
https://www.imca-int.com/alerts/safety-flash/  and enter text in the search box. 

 

 

