AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/08 

Safety Flash

July 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Ballast Tank Hydrogen 

A  member  has  reported  a  serious  confined  space  incident  in  which  a  crew  member  was  injured.    The  incident  occurred 
during quarterly planned maintenance of the leakage detection system in the base of one of the legs of a semi-submersible 
accommodation unit alongside fixed production platform. 

A crew member lifted the manhole cover to gain access to the tank to undertake planned maintenance.  The crew member 
was working next to his supervisor who began to lower gas sampling equipment into the tank as part of normal pre-entry 
checks.  Within a minute of the manhole cover being lifted, the gas sampling equipment (which was 3m down into the 6m 
height of the tank) gave an alarm, and the crew member lost consciousness. 

Subsequent gas sampling during the investigation was undertaken and recorded unexpectedly high levels of hydrogen.  The 
presence of hydrogen can be explained by the electrolytic reaction between the sacrificial anodes and the steel within the 
ballast tank below the tank being worked upon. 

The crew member who lost consciousness recovered fully with no residual ill health effects. 

The company involved made the following recommendations: 

♦  Vent ballast tanks regularly in order to prevent hydrogen build-up; 

♦  Ensure appropriate steps are taken to purge gases from ballast tanks prior to tank opening; 

♦  Using appropriate equipment, conduct tests for the presence of hydrogen before tank entry; 

♦  Remain mindful of the potential for build-up of hydrogen in ballast tanks where sacrificial anodes are used; 

♦  Review gas sampling procedure. 

2 

Incorrectly Colour Coded Oxygen Cylinders 

A member has reported that it has received a small number of ‘W’ size oxygen cylinders which were incorrectly labelled as 
nitrogen (oxygen free). 

Members are reminded of the guidance set out in IMCA D 043 – Marking and colour coding of gas cylinders, quads and banks for 
diving applications – and particularly of section 7, ‘Gas sampling’: 

“Sampling of all gases must be carried out prior to the commencement of, and during, diving operations. 

Gas cylinders and quads as received from the supplier should have a label attached and a purity certificate stating the composition 
of the gas they contain.  However, it is stressed that analysis of gas as received from a supplier to a diving installation or site is the 
responsibility of a nominated and competent individual and that the ultimate authority for establishing the exact contents of any gas 
cylinder, bank or unit before use rests with the relevant supervisor.” 

 

3  Hand Injury 

A member has reported an incident in which a crew member suffered a serious hand injury during lifting operations.  In the 
course of at-sea loading and offloading of containerised units from the company’s larger vessel to another smaller third-party 
vessel, the crane operator had landed a gas cylinder rack on the deck of the other vessel when a crew member from the 
other vessel requested the banksman to lift the load to allow him to straighten up the rack. 

Owing  to the sea  swell, when  the  gas  cylinder  rack  was  lifted,  it  moved  suddenly  towards  an  adjacent  waste  skip and  the 
crew member trapped his right hand between the gas rack and the waste skip causing a serious injury to the hand.  The crew 
member received first aid treatment and was later medevaced to shore for surgical treatment. 

Position of 
crew member 
 

Point of contact 

Deck layout on third-party vessel at time of incident 

Position of crew member at time of incident 

 

 

Further investigation revealed the following basic causes: 

♦  The crew member was not warned by his colleagues that he was in an unsafe situation; 

♦  The crew member was in an improper or unsafe position for the task and did not follow established lifting procedures; 

♦  There was a lack of experience in cargo operations. 

The following were considered contributory factors: 

♦  Poor sea conditions (sea state approximately 2m); 

♦  Congested deck owing to small size of vessel on which incident occurred. 

The company recommended the following actions: 

♦  Crews on third-party supply vessels to be provided with appropriate instruction on proper lifting and handling working 

practice; 

vessels; 

♦  Ensure all personnel are aware that they can stop the job when unsafe acts or conditions are observed on third-party 

♦  Ensure proper selection of type/size of vessel for cargo operations; 

♦  Ensure better planning onshore and better organisation of deck space to minimise pinch points; 

♦  Ensure crew are fully aware of the danger of pinch points; 

♦  Ensure  good  communication  between  contractor  vessel  and  third-party  attending  vessels  during  at-sea  loading  and 

unloading operations. 

 

