SAFETY FLASH 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 17/18 

 

August 2018 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Floating Production Platform Evacuated Amid Power Outage 

What happened? 

The United States’ Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has published Safety Alert 333, relating 
to the evacuation of a floating production platform in the U.S Gulf of Mexico, which occurred as a consequence of 
a power outage.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  At the time of the incident, the  floating production facility was operating on a single uninterruptible power 
supply (UPS), which failed.  This failure cut automatic battery back-up to emergency power users, including the 
vessel management system (VMS) and operational critical telecoms; 

  When the emergency generator was started,  in the process of syncing the emergency generator with main 
power, the UPS's static bypass switch opened due to the emergency generator’s frequency falling slightly out 
of range with normal power.  When the static bypass switch opened, all loads on the emergency bus lost power 
as a result of these loads being dropped and an abandon platform sequence was initiated; 

  Several  attempts  to  re-establish  power  were  unsuccessful  due  to  the  logic  sequence  in  the  VMS,  which 
continued  to  send  shutdown  trip  signals  to  the  emergency  generator  circuit  breaker  whenever  the  control 
system rebooted.  This logic sequence was hidden from the workers because the VMS ordinarily rebooted from 
battery power, which was unavailable.  The backup script in the application did not inhibit the abandon platform 
shutdown signal during reboot. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

The  solution  that  resulted  in  power  restoration  was  to  physically  inhibit  (disconnect  wires)  to  the  emergency 
generator breaker. 

BSEE recommends that operators consider the following options: 

  Review ‘black start’ procedures to include, as a minimum consideration, the complete loss of power to the VMS; 

  Consult with the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) to evaluate and make appropriate recommendations 

for UPS protective features and their impact on availability of sub-distribution systems; 

  Review the performance of critical ventilation systems relative to their basis of design and develop a strategy 

to address maintenance requirements; 

  Review the project engineering handover process for critical electrical systems to ensure personnel are properly 
trained  to operate  new  equipment.    Particularly,  electrical  technicians  should be  knowledgeable  of  what  is 
necessary to power up emergency loads after failures; 

  Create or review a platform evacuation procedure specifically prompted by a facility blackout.  This evacuation 

procedure is unique because it is: 
  more urgent than an evacuation due to, for example, a hurricane  
 

the procedure should consider a possibility of limited communications and reduced availability of resources 
due to the blackout; 

  Verify that all  necessary safety and environmental management system  (SEMS)  documentation (emergency 
response plans, as-built electrical drawings, piping & instrumentation diagrams, operating procedures, etc.) are 
up-to-date and accessible in hardcopy format. 

If you have further questions not addressed in the recommendations above, contact BSEE at the number listed on 
the Safety Alert. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Power Loss within dive control 

2  Wire Rope Sling Failed During Lifting Operations 

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published Safety Alert 18-18 regarding the failure of equipment on an anchor 
handling vessel (AHV) during chain handling operations. 

The  crew  were  preparing  a  chain  (76mm  in  length)  for  a  decanting  operation  onto  a  semi-submersible  mobile 
offshore drilling unit (MODU).  Whilst recovering the chain, the starboard-aft tugger wire was connected to the 
chain, using a 6Te wire rope sling.  The chain was recovered and was approximately a quarter of the way up the 
deck when the wire rope sling failed, causing the 76mm chain to fall onto the deck and into the AHV locker.  No one 
was injured. 

What actions were taken? 

  The crew assessed the damage to the wire rope sling.  After inspection, the sling was discarded; 

  All the equipment used during the operation was inspected and no damage was found; 

  A new 10Te sling was to be used, the chain reconnected and successfully recovered.   

What lessons were learned? 

  Equipment inspections should be made before any operations are undertaken; 

 

  Ensure all lifting equipment is suitable and fit for purpose. 

  A clear deck policy was in place when this incident took place – it is important to make sure that you have a 
clear deck policy in place when undertaking operations.  This will, as in this incident, prevent any injuries from 
occurring. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents 

  Damaged Wire Rope Slings 

  Failure Of Steel Wire Sling 

3  Near Miss: Onboard O2 Bottle Leaked into Diving Bell 

What happened? 

The entire contents of the onboard O2 bottle leaked into the diving bell during a bell run at -140m, causing a much 
higher than normal PPO2 reading. (2.2 PPO2).  The incident occurred when the bellman left the Oxygen add valves 
cracked open during bell pre-dive checks.  The contents of the single 50 litre bottle drained into the bell and the 
bell run was aborted, due to the lack of O2 which might have been required in an emergency. 

 

 The Bellman got distracted during bell pre-dive checks and both needle valves were left cracked open; 

  There was a long delay before the high O2 readings reached the topside analysers in dive control due to the 

  The portable O2 analyser in the bell was not believed because it had been unreliable in the past; 

  The bell onboard O2 pressure gauge was not easily read from inside the bell. 

What went wrong? 

300m bell umbilical; 

What were the causes 

 

Insufficient mechanical safeguards were in place to prevent this from happening.  In the past, many saturation 
systems had an O2 buffer tank installed in the bell.  There was a three-way valve attached to it that would only 
allow the tank to be either filled or drained, but only one operation at a time could be performed.  These tanks 
are not always present now; 

  The time it took for bell atmosphere to reach the topside analyser in dive control was unusually long; 

  The high reading on the bell portable analyser was not believed as it had not been reliable in the past; 

  Human error was also a factor as the bellman got distracted during bell checks and forgot to close the two 

supply valves. 

What lessons were learned?  What actions were taken? 

 

If more than one O2 bottle had been online, the outcome could have been worse; 

  The bell run was aborted, and the bell atmosphere was flushed through; 

  The bell divers UPDT was calculated and they were found to be within acceptable limits; 

  The divers were stood down and monitored; 

  The O2 plumbing was leak checked; 

  Additional checks were added to ensure that all of the O2 valves were secure after use; 

  An additional O2 analyser was added in the bell; 

  Buffer tanks were sourced for any system that did not have one already installed; 

  Portable O2 analysers with alarms, suitable for use in the bell were sourced. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  High potential near miss: poor O₂ content in supplied air – diver temporarily lost consciousness 

  Use Of Pre-Mixed Nitrox Gases 

  Failure To Follow Gas Quad Procedure 

4  High Potential Near Miss: Unplanned Handling of Unexploded Ordnance 

What happened? 

During debris removal/recovery operations being undertaken along a subsea cable trenching corridor, several items 
of unexploded ordnance (UXO) were bought to the surface and 
landed on deck with recovered debris.  

During  the  initial  phases  of  the  operation,  several  boxes 
previously classified as concrete debris were investigated and 
observed  to  be  boxes  containing  dumped  munitions.    These 
boxes were left in place on the seabed.  Later in the operation 
an  item  recovered,  believed  to  be  ‘machine  parts’,  was 
recovered to the vessel deck.  The box was handled by vessel 
crew before they realised it was a WWII munitions box.  Expert 
advice was obtained and the UXO was returned to the seabed. 

What went wrong? 

Investigation determined that the likelihood of an uncontrolled detonation was low.  However, since the potential 
risk at the time of handling was unknown, the situation was defined to be out of control and thus classified as high 
potential. 

Our member noted a number of barrier failures leading up to the recovery of the debris: 

  Contact had been made with the local Armed Forces regarding the trenching corridor.  It was stated that a re-
organising  of  this  service  within  the  Armed  Forces  has  caused  information  to  be  lost  or  misplaced.    The 
information received back from the relevant department dealing with this information was that this corridor 
was ‘clean’ and free from known WWII dumped munitions; 

  A pre-survey was carried out of the area and most of the debris was located.  However, none of the items were 
identified as  potential UXOs.  Machinery parts,  concrete blocks, wire, barrel  etc. were  used to describe the 
findings;  

  A risk assessment was completed for debris removal.  However, UXO was not mentioned as it was perceived 

not to be a risk due to pre-survey information;  

  An ROV attempted to move ‘concrete objects’ which disintegrated, and cartridges fell out.  A cartridge magazine 
was picked up by the ROV and a request made for it to be brought to deck.  Some cartridges were released, a 
magazine was released by the ROV and dropped to seabed.  No ‘all stop’ called at this stage; 

  Shift logs identified that the ROV continued to locate and move additional items of potential ammunition into 
subsea  basket  and  relocated  what  was  thought  to  be  barrels/drums,  but  what  were  later  identified  to  be 
munitions.  Operations continued and no ‘all stop’ called;  

  Personnel  handled  dangerous  items,  bringing  them  to  deck,  and  one  person  tampered  with  a  piece  of 

ammunition attempting to verify its condition.  Personnel raised concern to on-board management; 

  Eventually the authorities were contacted, and the advice provided was to return the recovered items to the 

seabed.  

lack of valid information  

lack of correct identification of debris 

lack of management intervention 

lack of adherence to procedures/lack of direction 

What were the causes? 

 

Immediate causes: 

  complacency; 

  Underlying causes: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

failure to apply suitable management of change (MoC) and adequately assess risk  

fundamental misunderstanding of key risks. 

Items recovered to vessel deck 

  

 

  Reinforcement required of stop work authority and MoC, specifically actions towards managers/leaders; 

  Revision required for procedures covering actions to be taken in the event of discovering dangerous items such 

What were the main lessons learned? 

as UXO; 

  Method of survey to be re-evaluated; 

  Additional training and guidance to teams involved in debris clearance operations. 

