Safety Flash 

November 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 28/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This flash covers three separate issues. Firstly, we have prioritised a near miss relating to pull pins in diving helmets.  
Secondly, several incidents relating to personnel safety, traffic management and traffic separation zones in the yard 
environment, and thirdly, three hand/finger injuries. 

1  KM 37k/ss Helmet Neck Dam Near Miss 

What happened 

During offshore subsea operations, an air diver reported to the surface that his helmet had flooded.  The supervisor 
instructed the  diver  to  return  to  the  basket.   He  then  asked  the  diver  to  clarify  what  had  happened.  The  diver 
reported his helmet had flooded and he had to reclose the neck dam lower hinged swing catch (locking collar). 

During the incident, the supervisor jumped the standby diver to assist.  The standby diver had made contact with 
the diver and confirmed with the supervisor that the neck dam was in place and the helmet was secured correctly. 
It was clear that the diver had closed the locking collar assembly resealing the helmet. 

Photo indicates the open locking collar assembly in open 

position, behind diver’s shoulders 

 

 

 

 

 
What went wrong 

Upon  investigation  of  the  dive  video  and  audio  recordings,  it  was  identified  that  at  some  point  during  diving 
operations the knurled end of both helmet locking pull pins, used to secure the locking collar assembly (see photo) 
had  caught  on  top  of  the  R-Vest  shoulder  harness  at  the  attachment  D-ring  “where  the  inspection  equipment 
(CP-UT  meter)  are  secured  via  a  rope  lanyard”.    This  had  pulled  the  locking  pins,  thus  resulting  in  the  locking 
mechanism coming open.  As a result, the locking collar assembly opened and dropped past the diver’s shoulders 
removing the primary guard that holds the helmet on the diver’s head. 

Just before the event the diver is heard to flush the helmet via the free flow.  This slight over-pressurisation caused 
the inner neck dam ring to pop out of the helmet outer neck dam ring.  When the free flow was stopped water 
could flood into the helmet. 

What were the causes? 

  The direct cause was found to be: 

  The knurled end of both helmet locking pull pins that secure the hinged locking collar assembly (see above 

photo) had caught on top of the R-Vest shoulder harness and pulled to open position; 

  The underlying root causes were found to be: 

  The swing hinged locking collar assembly dropped to an open position whilst the diver was working, without 

him noticing, and passed the top of his shoulders as he leaned forward to conduct tasks 

  Activation of helmet free flow to help demist the visor caused a slight over-pressurisation inside the helmet 
resulting in the neck dam O-ring popping open.  This allowed water to enter the helmet when free flow was 
turned off; 

  Root causal factors identified were: 

  Design failure of the locking pull pins was not addressed during helmet maintenance which recommended 

fitting of KM Pull Pin Sleeve Kit part #525-112. 

Lessons learnt 

flash 20/16 issued in August 2016; 

  Helmets should have been maintained and modified to address previously identified findings in the IMCA safety 

  Kirby Morgan Dive Systems Inc have addressed the potential issue by developing 
a Pull Pin Sleeve Kit part #525-112 (see image to right).  This device helps reduce 
the possibility of pins been inadvertently operated.  They were not fitted to the 
equipment involved. 

Actions taken 

  All helmets returned to workshop for fitting of KM Pull Pin Sleeve Kits; 

  Divers given familiarisation brief of with potential hazard; 

  Dive tenders reminded of the need to follow pre-dive dressing procedures, ensuring the neck dam is locked and 

secure and recording that this check has taken place;  

  To prevent recurrence, divers and tenders were instructed to be vigilant regarding items that could cause or 

interfere with the pull pins; 

  The practice of hanging work tools on the upper part of D-ring on recovery harness will be stopped. 

Members should refer to:  

  Diving helmet: Failure of sealed pull pin  

  Unintentional release of diving helmet – neck dam/helmet securing arrangements 

 

 
2 

Two Yard-Based Fatal Road Traffic Accidents (UK HSE) 

Incident 1: Worker fatally crushed between two articulated vehicles 

What happened 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) has prosecuted a road haulage firm 
after  an  employee  was  crushed  between  two  articulated  vehicles  and 
subsequently died from his injuries.  A driver suffered fatal injuries when his 
vehicle rolled forward out of control whilst he was coupling the HGV (heavy 
goods vehicle) tractor unit to a trailer.  See here for original press release. 

What went wrong/causes 

UK  HSE  investigation  found  that  the  company  had  failed  to  implement  safe  systems  of  work  or  monitoring 
arrangements to ensure that its drivers were consistently undertaking coupling and uncoupling operations safely, 
in line with widely available industry guidance.  As a result of this, a culture developed whereby its drivers were not 
always applying trailer parking brakes. 

Incident 2: Worker died after being struck by a reversing telehandler 

A worker was struck by a reversing telehandler when crossing the work 
yard.  The worker sustained multiple injuries and later died in hospital.  
See here for original press release. 

What went wrong/causes 

UK HSE investigation found that: 

The HSE inspector noted: 
 

  The company had failed to address the management of large vehicle movements on its site; 

  The company had not carried out an on-site health and safety inspection; 

  The driver of the telehandler involved in the incident had not received any training in operating this vehicle. 

This was a wholly avoidable incident, caused by the failure of the company and its director to take simple steps.  
Vehicle movements…were not controlled even at a basic level at this company’s site.  The company failed to 
have  adequate  pedestrian  segregation  measures  such  as  walkways  or  crossing  points  in  areas  where 
pedestrians walked routinely. Reversing of large vehicles near  to pedestrians was  commonplace. This was a 
dangerous mix which led to this tragic incident. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

IMCA has highlighted these incidents to members for three reasons: 

  Owing to the importance of safe traffic management in goods yards, shipyards and on docksides; 

  Many members employ haulage companies as sub-contractors; 

  As a timely reminder about workplace safety culture: “… a culture developed whereby its drivers were not…” 

particularly in sub-contractors or further down the supply chain. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents 

  Worker trapped and injured by reversing vehicle 

  Crewman struck and injured by forklift truck 

  Fatality: Crew member struck by forklift during quayside operations 

 

 
3  Near Miss: Worker in Dockyard Almost Struck by a ‘Cherry Picker’ Crane 

What happened 

A member reports a near miss incident in which a worker was almost hit by a ‘cherry picker’ mobile crane.  Whilst 
walking  to  a  dry  dock,  a  shipyard  visitor  was  almost  struck  by  the  vehicle  when  it  suddenly  reversed  driving 
direction. 

 

 

What went wrong/causes 

Several safeguards were not implemented causing a chain of errors that resulted in a hazardous occurrence. 

  The cherry picker operator did not look first before reversing; 

  There  was  inadequate  traffic  management  or  separation  zones:  the  pedestrian  walkways  were  not  clearly 

visible as the paint markings had faded away; 

  The  traffic  separation  scheme  for  equipment  and  pedestrians  had  been  blocked  off  with  the  storage  of 

Our  member  notes  that  in  some  locations,  influencing  the  workplace  safety  culture  of  the  shipyard  can  be  a 
significant challenge.  Members may wish to refer to IMCA SEL 032 – Guidance on safety in shipyards. 

materials. 

Actions taken 

  Further toolbox talks for all equipment operators to address safe work practices;  

  All materials blocking the pedestrian walkway were removed; 

  Traffic separation scheme marking were refreshed with a new coat of paint. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Worker trapped and injured by reversing vehicle 

  Crewman struck and injured by forklift truck 

  Fatality: Crew member struck by forklift during quayside operations 

 

Finger Injury during Work with Rotating Machinery 

 
4 

What happened 

Whilst working with a pillar drilling machine, a crewman got his glove 
caught in the rotating bit and dislocated his left thumb.  The incident 
happened  on  an  ocean-going  cargo  vessel.    Two  engine  room 
crewmen were using a drilling machine in the engine room workshop 
to fabricate a small part.  One of the crewmen put on leather gloves 
and  tried  to  remove  some  metal  chips  that  came  out  during  the 
drilling process.  His glove got entangled with the drill bit resulting in 
him dislocating his left thumb. 

Both  hand  and  foot  operated  emergency  stop  was  immediately 
activated.  The injured person was assisted by other crew members 
to cut off the glove and he was accompanied to the vessel hospital.  
After  consultation  with  medical  authorities  over  the  radio, 
treatment was given on board.  A splint with bandage was applied 
to  immobilise  the thumb and  pain  killers  administered.    Ten  days 
later when the vessel came to port, the injured person was sent to 
the doctor, where he was declared medically unfit and signed off. 

What went wrong/causes 

  There was no evidence of risk assessment, no toolbox talk was conducted; 

  The injured person was wearing gloves while using the drilling machine – there was a warning sign prohibiting 

wearing of gloves when operating the drill, posted in front of the drilling machine; 

 

Lack of safety awareness/habits; 

  The immediate causes were: 

 

Improper use of PPE – the glove got entangled with the drill bit 

  Carelessness and lack of safety awareness – the warning sign prohibiting wearing of gloves when operating 

Improper use of equipment – the proper cleaning tools were not available for drilling and machining jobs; 

drilling machine was ignored 

 

 

 

  Causal factors were: 

Inadequate planning – this potential risk was not identified 

Inadequate supervision; 

  The root cause was, the injured person did not follow instructions: he was not compliant with existing company 

requirement on personal protective equipment (PPE) when working with rotating equipment. 

Actions taken 

  Suitable and sufficient risk assessment to be carried out for routine and non-routine work; 

  More effective toolbox talks to be held discussing hazards and controls; 

  Reiteration of company policy that gloves are NOT TO BE WORN when working with rotating machinery; 

  Warning signage if posted to be clearly visible; 

  Consider additional supervision for less experienced crew. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident 

  Hand injury whilst using pillar drill 

Please refer to IMCA’s short video on hand safety. 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Finger Injury during Main Engine Exhaust Valve Overhaul 

 
5 

What happened 

An engineer suffered a crushed finger when there was an unplanned movement of a main engine exhaust valve 
during maintenance.  The second engineer and a fitter were working together on the overhaul of a main engine 
exhaust valve.  After completion, the valve was tested with compressed air.  Once the air was shut off and the seat 
descended, the second engineer noticed some dirt on the face of the seat.  He instructed the fitter to stand clear 
using hand signals, and attempted to clean the dirt with a rag.  At that moment, the fitter opened the air and the 
seat face moved upwards, crushing the second engineer’s finger as he attempted to remove his hand. 

The vessel had to deviate from its course to the nearest port to disembark the injured person for further treatment 
ashore, to substantial cost.  The second engineer suffered an LTI and loss of his fingertip. 

A risk assessment had been reviewed and a toolbox talk had been carried out prior to the overhaul.  It was not clear 
that communication with hand signals had been discussed at this stage.  In the preceding weeks, the same team 
had undertaken overhaul of three similar exhaust valves; 

 

What went wrong? 

  Some of the immediate causes were found to be: 

  Poor communication: Although in plain sight of each other, the noise of the engine room mean that verbal 
communication  was  not  possible  between  the  second  engineer  and  the  fitter.    The  fitter  didn’t  see  or 
understand  the  hand  signals  from  the  second  engineer,  and  the  reopening  of  the  valve  was  not 
communicated to the second engineer 

  Hand placed in dangerous position “in the line of fire” 
  Following the successful test of the overhauled valve, the compressed air was not disconnected prior to 

second engineer cleaning the face – crew were servicing equipment that was still in operation 

 

Inadequate planning – there was a failure to disconnect the compressed air prior to cleaning the face 

  Hazardous environmental condition – noisy engine room; 

  The root causes were found to be: 

  There was no adequate system of communication and confirmation during operations in noisy environment 

was not identified during risk assessment neither discussed in toolbox talk 

  There was no isolation (lockout/tagout) 
 

Inadequate compliance – the risk in this routine, recurring task was seen as tolerable. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  Develop method of communications in noisy work environment and ensure this is included in risk assessment; 

  Review/familiarisation of crew on company lockout/tagout procedures. 

 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents. (All are similar to the above though not identical. 
Poor planning and risk assessment, inadequate communications and inadequate procedures, and hand positioning, 
have led in all these cases to serious hand injuries.) 

  Serious finger injury: Procedures during engine maintenance 

Lost time injury (LTI): Loss of end of thumb 

Lost time injury (LTI): Finger injury whilst working in engine room 

Lost time injury (LTI): Thumb injury 

Finger Injury: What Happens When you DON’T use the Right Tool for the Right Job 

What happened 

A crewman attempted to remove the impeller from a fire pump using a hammer and punching rod.  While he was 
hammering, a steel splinter of the punching rod (3-4 mm) chipped off and punctured his right hand. 

The incident happened during corrective maintenance to a fire pump.  The injured person was tasked by the Chief 
Engineer to disassemble the pump, as the Chief was busy with other work.  The injured person observed that the 
impeller was stuck on its shaft due to misaligned splines between impeller and shaft.  He started to attempt removal 
of the impeller by knocking out the shaft using a hammer and a steel punching rod.  The punching rod splintered 
and the splinter went through the injured person’s glove and entered the soft tissues between thumb and index 
finger.  

 

What went wrong/causes 

  The tools selected for the job were inadequate; 

  An adequate and correct gear puller specially designed for the task was not available on board; 

 

Inadequate hand protection equipment was used for the task; cotton gloves were used instead of mechanical 
impact protection gloves, which were available onboard. 

Lessons learnt 

  Ensure the right tools to do the job are available;  

  Proper PPE, whilst a last line of defence, can minimise consequences or prevent injuries from happening. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

  RWC – Caught between: Finger smashed by tooling [An immediate cause was inappropriate or incorrect tools 

used for the job] 

 

Lost time injury (LTI): Finger injury whilst working in engine room [An immediate cause was improper use of 
equipment] 

 

 

 

6 

 

