AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/12 

Safety Flash 

  June 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Uncontrolled Ascent of Lift Bag 

A member has reported an incident in which an inflated underwater lift bag was let go, causing it to rise to the surface in an 
uncontrolled way.  The incident occurred when a diver was working on the seabed and engaged in rigging a 100kg lift bag, 
which was to be used to assist in handling and positioning a load.  The lift bag was rigged with a small shackle through its 
strops.  The load was rigged with a large shackle attached to the lift strops and a holdback.  

When connecting the two however the diver, instead of joining the two shackles together, simply passed the lift bag strops 
through the larger shackle (see illustration below).  When the rigging was complete, the diver untied the inverter line and 
asked the dive supervisor for pneumo gas to be supplied, so he could put a small amount of gas into the lift bag, to cause it to 
stand up, and check the overall arrangement.  

Showing arrangement of shackles that allowed lift bag to come free and ascend to surface 

 

As  the  diver  proceeded  to  tie  the  inverter  line  to  a  standoff,  the  gas  in  the  lift  bag  caused  it  to  ascend  with  just  enough 
buoyancy to lift the lift bag rigging and small shackle through the larger shackle.  Although by no means fully inflated the lift 
bag then ascended to surface. 

There were no injuries or damage to equipment.  The location of the lift bag, strops, associated rigging, and positioning of the 
divers did not pose a risk to either from snagging of umbilicals or hands being trapped or entangled around any part of the 
strops or rigging.  There was insufficient buoyancy in the bag to lift either diver from working depth. 

An investigation revealed the following: 

the lift bag; 

♦  The immediate cause was that the diver, though competent for the task in hand, made a mistake during the rigging up of 

♦  Underlying causes associated with the incident were considered to be: 

risk assessment for the various parts of this task was not adequate nor fully applied 

– 
–  written  instructions  for  internal  use  were not  entirely  clear  or  in  sufficient  detail  (although  an  admittedly  obvious 
precaution, neither IMCA D 016 – Underwater air lift bags, nor the company procedure for the use of lift bags based 

 

on this guidance, included a step specifically stating that holdback and inverter lines should be attached BEFORE any 
gas is introduced) 

–  monitoring – checks and inspections of workplace precautions and risk control methods were not adequate.  

The following corrective and preventative actions were made: 

♦  Vessel ‘safety focus’ on checking/rechecking progress with activities/tasks; 

♦  Revision of in-house procedures for use of lift bags, to include specifics on checking lines/rigging before inflation; 

♦ 

IMCA was advised of the incident and a proposal was put forward for revision of IMCA D 016; 

♦  Appropriate  pre-job  briefings  were  enhanced  (where  there  is  a  use  of  lift  bags)  to  ensure  safety  requirements  and 

lessons learnt from the incident are communicated and applied as part of ongoing raising of awareness; 

♦  Details and video footage of the incident circulated to others in industry for assistance with future training courses; 

♦  Encouraging younger divers and supervisors to attend training courses on subsea lifting and rigging (including lift bags); 

♦  Post saturation debriefs held with dive teams including details of the incident, review of video footage and sharing key 

lessons learnt. 

The following lessons were drawn from the incident: 

♦  The importance of ensuring adherence to task risk assessments so control measures identified are applied stringently; 

♦  Checks  and  re-checks  as  per  safe  working  procedure  and  standard  practice  should  be  enforced  by  workers  and 

supervisors to ensure that risk control measures are implemented and maintained. 

2  Near Miss: Person Fell from Boarding Ladder 

A member has reported an incident in which a person slipped from the barge boarding ladder and almost fell into the water.  
During  a  short  boat  transfer  from  the  accommodation  vessel  to  the  barge,  the  anchor handling  tug  moored  alongside  the 
barge and the crew transfer commenced.  The transfers were performed in an orderly fashion with the personnel patiently 
waiting  for  the  best  moment  to  step  from  the  anchor  handling  tug  (AHT)  on  to  the  ladder  of  the  barge.  However,  one 
person missed his step, lost his grip and fell between the AHT and the barge.  He landed on one of the tyre fenders and was 
immediately helped inboard by other passengers still on the AHT.  The transfer operation was aborted immediately and the 
AHT moved to the other (lee) side of the barge.  The man that fell suffered only a superficial scratch on the right arm.  

An investigation revealed the following:  

♦  Existing project-specific personnel transfer protocols/procedures were not followed; 

♦  There was inadequate allocation of resources.  The dedicated crew tender was being  used for other purposes at that 

time, resulting in the use of an AHT to perform a crew tender job; 

♦  Precautionary  measures  already  identified  in  the  hazard  identification  (HAZID)  (i.e.  suitable  embark/disembark 

arrangements) were not installed; 

♦  The job should have been stopped under ‘STOP WORK’ authority, but nobody did so.  

The following measures were put in place to prevent recurrence:  

♦  Re-write of the project specific protocol/procedures for personnel transfer; 

♦  Nomination of a ‘marine traffic controller’ to perform the following tasks 

–  observe all vessel movements to and from the barge 
– 

provide advice on which side of the barge to moor up;  

♦  Reinforce the ‘STOP WORK’ authority in project documentation and project induction; 

♦  Determine if additional training is required for personnel engaged in vessel-to-barge transfer.  

For further information on this subject, members may wish to refer to IMCA SEL 025 – Guidance on the transfer of personnel 
to and from offshore vessels. 

 
3  LTI: Crewman’s Finger Pinched When Moving the Gangway  

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman suffered a serious pinch injury to his finger whilst moving a gangway.  
The  incident  occurred  during  preparation  for  departure  from  port  when  two  crewmen  and  the  second  officer  were 
removing and stowing the ship’s gangway.  The gangway was lifted onboard and whilst it was being slid along the deck for 
stowage, one crewman had his finger pinched between the gangway frame and an isolation valve on deck resulting in a deep 
cut to his finger.  

The chief officer started to carry out first aid to stop the bleeding.  The crewman was subsequently transferred to hospital 
where he received further treatment before returning to the ship.  On his return, the decision was taken that the crewman 
would not be fit for duty and that he should return home to recover fully.  An extended period of healing was necessary and 
the crewman was off work for five weeks. 

Showing pinch-point between gangway frame and valve, and injured finger 

 

An investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The crane normally used for moving the gangway was out of order and awaiting repairs.  Therefore a smaller gangway 

was used that allowed for crew members to manually handle it into position; 

♦  This smaller gangway was normally stored on the cargo deck but was in the way during cargo operations and had been 

removed; 

♦  The risk assessment was not adequate:  

it did not adequately cover the gangway being manually handled 
it did not identify the possibility of pinch points 

– 
– 
–  other structures such as the isolation valve had not been highlighted as a potential danger; 

♦  A toolbox meeting was held, but did not identify the additional risks involved with the manual handling of the gangway; 

♦  No management of change was carried out for the change of gangway. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

♦  Reviewed the risk assessment for this operation; 

♦  Made engineering changes to the isolation valve so that it cannot become a pinch point; 

Investigated alternative gangway storage facility; 

♦  Alter positioning of gangway to establish easy handling and positioning of the gangway by the crane; 

Introduce and require use of a management of change procedure. 

♦ 

♦ 

 
4  Snagging Damage during Lifting Operations 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  the  following  Safety  Flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  part  of  a  platform 
supply vessel was  damaged when a large piece of equipment was lifted off it onto an offshore installation.   The  load being 
lifted snagged on a walkway and caused the damage.  The root cause of the incident was that the lift plan and risk assessment 
failed to identify all the hazards involved.  

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.13.pdf 

5  Near Miss: Dropped Objects 

The MSF has published the following two Safety Flashes regarding a number of recent near miss incidents involving dropped 
objects: 

♦ 

♦ 

In one incident on an offshore vessel, a piece of stainless steel flat bar fell from the davit from a height of 2 metres and 
narrowly  missed  a  crew  member.    The  report  can  be  downloaded  from  www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-
files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.14.pdf 

In  another  incident  on  a  vessel  lying  alongside  an  installation,  a  steel  bar  about  1  metre  long  and  3  centimetres  in 
diameter  was  seen  to  fall  on  to  the  deck  from  either  the  roof  of  a  container  or  from  overhanging  scaffolding  on  the 
installation.    The  report  can  be  downloaded  fromwww.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-
12.15.pdf.  

