SAFETY FLASH 

 December 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 29/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1  Umbilical Termination Failure and Loss of ROV 

What happened? 

An ROV system had just completed a test dive to 3000m and was being returned to deck.  Upon lifting the system 
out of the water, the umbilical became detached from the TMS bullet.  The ROV and TMS fell to the seabed and 
landed upside down on a firm seabed at 3276m water depth.  The vehicle was located by another ROV system from 
the same vessel.  The system (ROV and TMS) was inspected on the seabed.  Based on that information and the sea 
conditions  (1.5m  significant  wave  height),  a  risk 
assessment  and  a toolbox  talk  (TBT)  were  carried  out 
which  determined  that  recovery  was  both  safe  and 
possible.  The spare bullet was terminated onto the ROV 
umbilical to allow it to be used to recover the system 
with the emergency recovery rigging on the TMS.  The 
ROV, TMS and umbilical termination were damaged in 
the incident.  No personnel were injured.  

What went wrong? 

The  parted  umbilical  termination  was  analysed  by  a 
third-party  specialist  laboratory.    Following  a  detailed 
engineering  examination  and  internal  investigation,  it 
was  concluded  that  the  umbilical  failed  because  its 
termination had been conducted in a very poor fashion 
with a number of clear defects observed. 

 

It was noted that the subcontract technician doing the termination did not demonstrate appropriate skill in 
how to conduct such terminations, and it was clear that procedures were not followed; 

  There  was  an  over-reliance  in  each  link  of  supply  chain  delivering  a  quality  product,  rather  than  following 

appropriate checking or verifying of quality.   

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Umbilical re-termination procedures were revised to provide clearer instruction and now include requirement 

for photographic evidence showing completion of each main step; 

  Umbilical  termination  considered  a  critical  point  of  assembly  therefore  quality control  processes  should be 

followed to confirm appropriate surveillance is applied to sub-contractor. 

Loss of ROV after Umbilical Termination failure and damage to ROV during recovery 

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

 

Loss of ROV: Dropped Object 

  ROV Main Lift Umbilical Failure 

2 

Fires Caused by Electronic Device Chargers 

What happened? 

The United States Bureau of Safety & Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has published Safety Alert 337 on fires 
relating to the charging of personal electronic devices.  IMCA has dealt with this before, most recently in  Safety 
Flash 18/18. 

BSEE has related several similar incidents: 

March 2016: A drillship’s fire alarm sounded due to a fire reported in the living quarters.  Crews mustered at their 
primary  muster  stations  and  fire  teams  were  deployed  to  extinguish  the  fire.    The  initial  response  with  fire 
extinguishers did not smother the fire, so a fire hose was required to completely extinguish the fire.  Although the 
source of the fire was classified as ‘undetermined’, findings suggested a wall mounted fluorescent light for marine 
use with receptacle, a universal adapter plugged into the light fixture, a phone charger plugged into the adapter, 
and/or a tablet left under the bunk pillow may have started the fire.  Damage as a result of the fire was estimated 
at $50,000. 

March  2018:  A  fire  occurred  in  temporary  living  quarters  after  a 
contractor left a cell phone charging on his mattress while at work 
for the day.   The charger wire  apparently failed, creating enough 
heat to ignite the bed sheet and mattress (see photo, right).  The 
fire  team  responded  to  the  area  and  quickly  extinguished  the 
flames.  No personnel were present at the time of the fire, and no 
injuries resulted from the incident. 

 

May 2018: Black soot 
was  noticed  above  the  entry  door  of  rented  living  quarters.    After 
power was isolated, personnel entered the building and found heat 
damage  to  the  ceiling  and  lights,  as  well  as  multiple  charred 
mattresses.  A possible cause of the fire was a tablet being charged 
on a bottom bunk hanging night stand (see photo, left).  The tablet 
and electrical receptacle were badly charred. 

No personnel were present at the time of the fires, and no injuries 
resulted from these incidents.  

Therefore, BSEE recommends:  

being brought offshore; 

up; 

  Charger cords for all electronic devices should be in good working condition (with no exposed wiring) prior to 

  Charging devices should not be left on surfaces that are potentially flammable or that can promote heat build-

  Avoid leaving charging cables or portable electronic devices on bedding; 

  Do not leave unattended devices connected to outlets found on lights in bunks; 

  Remove electronic devices from chargers and outlets once fully charged; 

 

Include  information  about  the  hazards  of  charging  portable  devices  during  orientations  and  post  relevant 
signage in living quarters. 

3  High Potential Near Miss: Anchor Brake Failure 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) have released Safety Alert 18-25 regarding a potentially fatal near miss incident 
during dry-docking.  

A  vessel’s  anchors  were  ranged  on  the  dock  bottom  for  inspection  and 
painting.    With  the  work  complete  and the  vessel  due  to  depart  from  the 
dock, the anchors were recovered.  Once recovered, the brakes were applied, 
guillotines on both anchors dropped across, and devils’ claws were engaged.  
The clutch was disengaged and the brake on the port anchor was tightened 
to ensure that it was properly applied before finishing the maintenance.  At 
tightening the break, the threaded spindle sheared, completely releasing the 
break band, meaning that the full weight of the anchor was taken on by the 
devils’  claw.   The  weight  of  the  anchor  forced  the  arms  of  the  claw  open, 
allowing the chain to run freely and the anchor and chair to run out to the 
dock bottom unrestricted.  

 

“devil's claw”: device used as a 
chain  stopper  to  grab  and  hold 
an anchor chain. It consists of a 
turnbuckle,  usually  attached  at 
the base of the anchor windlass, 
and  a  metal  hook  with  two 
curved fingers that grab one link 
of a chain. 

What happened?  What were the causes? 

Stripping the brake assembly for investigation revealed that both linkages housing the failed threaded spindle were 
seized.  Lack of rotation in the linkages caused a ‘bending force’ to be applied to the spindle upon tightening the 
break.  Over time, this has caused stress within the spindle, resulting in complete failure.  

  Maintenance: 

maintenance system (PMS) 

  maintenance on the windlass and associated parts was conducted in line with requirements of planned 

  all parts of the windlass were greased regularly; however, as identified in other mechanical failures, grease 
from  the  greasing  nipples  had  not  penetrated  every  part  of  the  equipment,  leading  to  the  linkages 
becoming seized; 

  Claw: 

 

 

 

 

  Guillotine: 

the devils claw had been engaged on the anchor cable and tightened, leaving no gap or slack in the lashing 

the two arms of the claw opened as the weight fell upon them, allowing the cable to pass through  

there was no significant corrosion noted on the equipment; 

the guillotine had not been secured in place when dropped across the cable when the break failed 

  because of this, it did not effectively stop the anchor cable running out when the claw failed.  

Claw as intended 

Claw post incident 

 

 

Failed section of brake assembly 

Failed section of brake assembly 

 

 

 

Anchor post incident 

 

What actions were taken? 

  Conduct thorough inspections of moving parts of the anchor windlass – particularly the brake band assembly.  

All moving parts should be confirmed operational;  

  Routine greasing of parts to ensure proper lubrication.  When greasing, moving parts should be moved to fill 

extent of operation to ensure full functionality;  

  Any seized or non-operational parts should be freed up at first opportunity; 

  Devils  claws  of  the  design  shown  were  replaced  with  wire  strops  of  appropriate  safe  working  load  (SWL).  

Alternative designs are to be reviewed by vessels; 

  All anchoring operations should include a check of the area to ensure no other part is placed at risk by the job; 
check over the side for any small craft at sea or in port.  Exclusion zone in the proximity of the anchor during 
dry dock.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Winch Brake Failure 

  Near Miss: Corrosion-related failure of bolts used to secure lifeboat winches 

4  Unsafe Backloading of Equipment 

What happened? 

Project related equipment was returned to a yard in a half-height container.  
The  equipment  came  from  a  project-chartered  vessel  which  had  been 
demobilised at a nearby port. 

As the half-height container was unloaded from the truck, it became obvious 
that  the  equipment  inside  was  inadequately  packed  and  secured.    The 
contents of the container included an empty intermediate bulk container (IBC) 
and a full propane gas cylinder. 

What went wrong? 

 

 

Inadequate active supervision during the demobilisation; 

Low risk perception and rushing to get the job finished; 

  Failure to acknowledge or understand hazardous acts/conditions and the 

importance of intervention. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Personnel to call an ‘All Stop’ if an unsafe act or condition is observed; 

  Vessel management should ensure all equipment is backloaded in a safe and secure manner. 

This is an ongoing ‘house-keeping’ issue which can be seen in previous reports.  A few examples are included here: 

 

Loading and securing of cargo 

  Unsecured Cargo Inside Containers 

  Poor Cargo Stowage: Material Damage On Container 

5 

Fatal Injury During Lifting Operations – Maersk Interceptor  

What happened? 

The  Norwegian  Petroleum  Safety  Authority  (PSA)  has  completed  its  investigation  of  the  fatal  accident  on  7 
December 2017 on  Maersk  Interceptor,  a  jack-up  facility,  in which  one  person  was  killed  and  another  seriously 
injured.  Several breaches of the (Norwegian) regulations were identified.  

This incident occurred in connection with lifting and installing a seawater pump.  Four people took part in the work, 
which involved the use of a steel sling.  The latter parted, and the pump fell down.  A power cable attached to the 
pump was pulled along in the fall and hit two people who were in the vicinity.  One of them fell into the sea and 
died, while the other was seriously injured.  Under slightly different circumstances, several lives could have been 
lost. 

The incident also had material and financial consequences. 

What were the causes? 

  The direct cause of the incident was that the lifting sling broke because it was overloaded; 

  Underlying causes were multiple and complex and can be related to design weaknesses and inadequacies in 

following these up, failure to identify risk at several levels, training, and planning and work practice. 

The full report can be found here. 

6  MSF: Near Miss – Potential Dropped Object During Cargo Operations 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published Safety Alert 18-23, in which a 20ft basket was lifted during offshore 
cargo operations.  The bridge team were later informed by the installation crew that a yellow metal plate had been 
found  trapped  inside  the  forklift  pocket  of  the  basket;  the  plate  was  used  to  protect  a  potential  trip  hazard 
(stanchion mounting holes).  

 

 

A detailed risk assessment had been in place and was used as the basis of the toolbox talk (TBT).  The following 
hazards were identified: 

  The use of covers for trip hazards was justified in removing the potential of a personal injury resulting from a 

trip – trip hazards marked or removed if possible; 

  Dropped objects were prevented by a pre-inspection of the container, prior to lifting, and the use of safe havens 

when any lift is suspended. 

However, the control measures listed did not include pre-inspection of the deck; the control measure requiring a 
pre-inspection  of  the  container  failed  as  it  did  not  identify  the  potential  dropped  object.    The  MSF  does  note, 
however, that the ability to conduct a full, detailed inspection of a container prior to lifting deck can be impaired 
and may not always identify potential dropped objects.  This can be due to: 

  Weather conditions – water on deck may not allow a full check of fork pockets; 

  The orientation of a container against the vessel’s rail or other cargo may impair visibility of all areas that could 

harbour a potential dropped object.  

What actions were taken? 

  The cover plate was replaced, and the trip hazard was removed.  

  Vessel crew were able to come up with a solution to prevent the plate from accidently being moved again – 
additional pins had been added which will hold the plate in place in the future (unless removed intentionally);  

  The vessel owner implemented preventative measures including: 

  update  the  risk  assessment  to  include  the  addition of  pre-work  inspection of the  deck  as  an  additional 

control measure against the hazard of potential dropped objects 

  update 500m entry checklist – include a requirement for a positive report to the bridge that pre-work deck 

inspection has been completed 

  all safety officers to conduct an inspection of the vessel plate cover arrangements to determine if a similar 

hazard could occur – take preventative actions where required 

  conduct additional briefing for all deck crew surrounding lessons learned  – particularly on the potential 

failure of the pre-lift check of the container and the new requirement for a pre-work deck inspection.  

 

 

The MSF has issued the following instructions to vessels owners: 

  All crew should be made aware of MSF Safety Alert 18-23 – display on noticeboards, print copies for mess rooms 

and discuss all learning points and recommendations at the next onboard safety meeting; 

  Any applicable points should be  actioned in order to reduce the likelihood of similar incidents occurring on 

another vessel. 

