AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/05 

July 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Malfunctions of Kirby Morgan B17 Side Block Non Return Valve 

A member has reported that it has experienced several failures of KM B17 side block non-return valves which have had little 
or no in-water service. 

To date, defects have been encountered in the following batch numbers: 

  P214-180 12/04 

  P214-180 02/05 

This may suggest potential of other batches which may exhibit similar faults. 

The incidents to date have been as follows: 

  Scenario 1 – It would appear that the random inability of the valve to seat was due to material peeling off the seal wiper 
(part #34).  The material has been found to be bypassing the ‘o’-ring seal (part #33) and lodging in the seat.  This has 
occurred each time the seat has been connected or disconnected from the body.  This is not a single unit occurrence 
and appears to be prevalent in batch P214-180 12/04.  Further investigations are ongoing; 

  Scenario 2 – During further investigation of non-return valves on the worksite, it was found that batch number P214 180 

02/05 failed during bell checks and was subsequently found to ‘stick’ whilst shaken. 

The  diving  contractor  has  had  extended  conversations  with  its  supplier,  which  has  contacted  Kirby  Morgan  Dive  Systems 
International  –  the  diving  helmet  manufacturer  (although  we  understand  the  manufacture  of  the  non-return  valve  is  sub-
contracted).  Discussions are ongoing, but the diving contractor feels an interim alert should be issued to all IMCA members 
and industry, identifying the potential problem and obvious severe consequences should umbilical services fail. 

Kirby Morgan has subsequently issued the attached notice, which it has asked IMCA to distribute as soon as possible. 

2  Serious Injury During Crane Operations 

A member has reported a serious injury that occurred during crane operations on a third party vessel.  The vessel had been 
released  from  towing  a  flexible  riser  and  the  tow-wire  had  been  recovered  to  the  vessel  deck.    The  crew  was  removing 
flotation and a soft strop extension from the tow wire using the port-side Palfinger crane. 

The  crane  operator,  controlling  the  crane  using  the  remote  control  flying  lead,  was  repositioning  the  crane  for  the  next 
operation when he drove the head of the boom up and into the grating floor of the A-frame walkway, 14 metres above the 
main deck.  The grating came loose due to the force and fell.  The crane operator, who was standing directly underneath the 
grating, was hit on the head and then the left foot by the falling grating, estimated to weigh between 10-12 kg. 

 

 

 

 

Although the injured person suffered four broken bones in his left foot, a wound to his left elbow and superficial injuries to 
his head (cut/bruising), the company concerned has noted that the potential for a fatality to have occurred in this incident 
cannot be over-emphasised. 

The company made the following observations as regards the likely immediate causes of the accident: 

  Lack of care and attention – This was a routine operation performed by the most experienced crane operator on the 
vessel.  Checks of the height of the crane boom in relation to overhead hazards should have been carried out prior to 
any crane movement; 

 

Incorrect working position – The crane operator had failed to stand in a safe working position and was directly under 
the hazard.  As a result of incorrect working position, he would have been unable to judge the height of the crane boom 
in relation to the A-frame walkway; 

 

Incorrect PPE – The injured person was not wearing safety boots but was in fact wearing backless safety shoes (clogs). 

The company has made the following notes and suggestions: 

  During routine work there is the possibility for complacency to arise, so treat every task as if it is a new task; 

  Examine your working position before starting work and ensure you assume the safest position for the task; 

Consider industry best practice for lifting, requiring three personnel to be involved in every lift – crane operator, banksman 
and load handler. 

Safety Flash 

Circle Seal Controls, Inc.  One-Way Valve Part P214-180. 

Defective Valve Dates 12/04 thru 2/05 

Safety Notice # 1 of 2005 

Defective One Way Valve Recall 

July 12, 2005 

Subject: 

 

Products Affected: 

URGENT SAFETY NOTICE! 

Kirby Morgan helmets, BandMasks and replacement parts. 

KMDSI P/N 555-195 One Way Valve and P/N 505-060 One Way Valve Assembly. 

Kirby  Morgan  Dive  Systems,  Inc.  (KMDSI)  has  learned  that  a  single  batch  of  non-return  (oneway)  valves 
manufactured by Circle Seal Controls, Inc.  may be defective.  These valves are used on all Kirby Morgan masks 
and helmets manufactured for surface-supplied diving.  The valves in question are date stamped on the valve body 
and fall within the date range 12/04 to 02/05.  If you have a valve like this on your helmet, YOU SHOULD STOP 
USING IT IMMEDIATELY and replace it with a valve that does not fall within this date range. 

The purpose of these valves is to prevent a back-flow of breathing gas up the diver’s hose in the event that the hose 
is severed between the diver and the surface.  If a diver’s hose is severed, a properly functioning non-return valve 
will automatically close and prevent the air within the helmet from being lost.  The valve also prevents the diver’s 
emergency gas supply (bail-out) from venting out through the non-return valve. 

In the defective valves, small slivers of the Teflon wiper (used in these valves as part of the sealing mechanism) 
may be cut off the Teflon wiper and interfere with the poppet that seals the valve.  When this occurs it is possible 
for  air  from  the  helmet  or  emergency  gas  supply  to  be  lost  through  the  valve  if  the  diver’s  umbilical  has  been 
severed or umbilical pressure is lost for any reason.  This could lead to the diver suffering severe personal injury, 
known as a “squeeze,” or death. 

Kirby Morgan has used the Circle Seal non-return valve in its commercial diving masks and helmets for over 30 
years.    Kirby  Morgan  tests  every  non-return  valve  on  completed  units  prior  to 
shipment,  but  the  damage  to  the  wiper  may  occur  when  the  valve  has  been 
overhauled, disassembled and re-assembled. 

Since  this  valve  is  also  an  industry  standard,  you  may  find  it  on  other 
manufacturer’s  helmets  as  well.    If  this  is  the  case,  you  should  contact  that 
manufacturer for a replacement. 

If you have one of these valves on your helmet, or are carrying a valve like this 
as a spare, DO NOT DIVE WITH IT! Please return it immediately to KMDSI, 
or  any  of  its  dealers,  for  a  free  replacement.    KMDSI  can  be  reached  at  1430 
Jason  Way,  Santa  Maria,  CA  93455.    Telephone  805-928-7772,  FAX  805-928-
0342.  Email kirwin@kirbymorgan.com.  Website www.kirbymorgan

.com. 

Photo  Caption:  Please  note  the  date  stamp  of  12/04  on  the  valve  shown  here.  
This is where to locate the date on your valve.  All valves within the date range 
12/04 to 2/05 should be replaced immediately. 

Document # 050322001 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

