AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/09 

Safety Flash 

May 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Super Puma Helicopter Accident – Initial Report 

The  UK  Air  Accidents  Investigations  Branch  (AAIB)  has  issued  its  initial  report  into  the  recent  Super  Puma  helicopter 
accident. 

Although  this  report  relates  to  a  North  Sea  incident,  the  relevant  issues  and  the  information  regarding  the  gearbox 
monitoring and warning systems on the helicopter type mentioned could apply anywhere. 

2  Fatality During Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a fatality occurred during lifting operations.  The incident occurred on a drillship 
while attempting to land a christmas tree (XT), using one of the vessel cranes, on to the XT trolley (see general view below).  
It was important to centralise the XT, which weighed 50 tons in air, on to the trolley. 

Centralising  guides  were  in  place  on  the  trolley  but  lifting  conditions  (heavy  load,  near  vertical  crane  boom  position  and 
movements of floating unit) required significant planning and supervision for this operation. 

The tree was approximately 0.6m above the trolley for final positioning when the main hoist hydraulic motor of the crane 
failed catastrophically.  The 50 ton XT fell on to the trolley and as a result a further item known as the ‘tea cosy’, weighing 
335 kg, came loose from its pedestal on top of the XT and bounced off the XT on its way down to the deck.  A member of 
the crew supervising the operation was struck by the tea cosy and died instantly. 

Tea cosy 
 

XT trolley 
hole cover 
 

Short XT 
trolley guide 
 

110 ton XT 
trolley 
 

Taglines 
(ropes) 
 

Tall XT 
trolley guide 
 

XT trolley 
skid rails 
 

 

 

Tea cosy 
pedestal 
 

Position of victim 
 

Tea cosy final position 
 

 

Following investigation, the main causes of the incident were identified as follows: 

♦  Failure in crane control: 

–  A  week  before  the  accident  the  main  hoist  hydraulic  motor  was  replaced  by  an  incorrectly  sized  motor  available 
onboard the vessel.  Though both motors look very similar and can be installed in the same position they have very 
different torque characteristics and are designed for different purposes 

–  There was no in-depth investigation performed following the first hydraulic motor failure a week before 
–  The  hydraulic  motor  was  changed  without  reference  to  the  crane  manufacturer’s  manuals  (which  were  available 

onboard) 

–  A review of the preventive  maintenance system used onboard identified  defects  in spare traceability, maintenance 

plans and personnel competency and training; 

♦  Failures in operational control: 

–  The tea cosy was not fully secured on its pedestal.  Under ‘normal’ lifting conditions, full securing of the tea cosy 
was not considered necessary; the sudden shock due to the free fall of the entire XT had not been identified as a 
hazard 
Free fall of XT assembly was not considered in the risk assessment 

– 
–  The victim was standing adjacent to the XT during the final landing; though he was co-ordinating the operation he 

had not been involved in the pre-job meeting. 

The following recommendations and corrective actions were proposed: 

♦  Ensure all are aware of the possibility of inappropriate hydraulic motors interchange on crane SEATRAK Model 7228; 

♦  Ensure full assessment during lifting/crane audits of onboard preventive maintenance system; 

♦ 

Improve  thoroughness  of  risk  assessments  in  order  to  correctly  identify  all  hazards.    Results  and  findings  must  be 
communicated during pre-job meetings to all persons involved in operation; 

♦  The design process and hazard identification study (HAZID) review of the XT should not only focus on final use of the 
product  but  also  upon  packaging,  fastening,  lifting,  transportation  and  installation  conditions  and  hazards.    This  should 
include design of the tea cosy pedestal and fastening method of all non permanently attached items; 

♦  Redesign and re-engineering of the centralising guides on the XT trolley; 

♦  More careful attention to the handling of heavy lifts on a drillship with a near vertical crane boom. 

3  Failed Nipple on Bolt Tensioning Jack 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  nipple  failed  on  a  bolt  tensioning  jack.    A  diver  was  carrying  out  bolt 
tensioning on a 24" pipeline being connected to a pipeline end manifold (PLEM) flange when the nipple flew out of the jack 
whilst the system was pressurised and hit the diver.  There were no injuries. 

On investigation it was noted that an incorrect bolt tensioning jack assembly had taken place when a nipple intended for the 
interconnecting  whips  had  been  installed  instead  of  the  recommended  correct  one.    The  difference  in  thread  size  is  quite 
minimal but can be easily identified visually by the different size orifice.  Whenever the incorrect nipple comes loose through 
constant utilisation, this difference is sufficient for it to be forced out when hydraulic pressure is applied to the system. 

It  is  recommended  that  all  nipples  on  used  bolt  tensioning  jacks/interconnecting  whips  should  be  removed  and  visually 
checked  to  ensure  that  the  correct  fitting  is  in  place,  and  replaced  as  necessary,  followed  by  a  maximum  system  pressure 
test. 

Nipple shown loose 

 

Correct adapter 

 

 

 

 
Initial Report 
 
 
ACCIDENT 

Aircraft Type and Registration:  
 
No & Type of Engines:  
 
Year of Manufacture:  
 
Date & Time (UTC):  
 
Location:  
 
Type of Flight:  
 
Persons on Board: 
 
Injuries: 
 
Nature of Damage:  
 
Commander’s Licence:  
 
Commander’s Age:  
 
Commander’s Flying Experience:  
 
 
 
Information Source:  
 
 

AAIB Ref:  EW/C2009/04/01 

Eurocopter AS332L2 Super Puma, G-REDL 

2 Turbomeca Makila 1A2 turboshaft engines 

2004  

1 April 2009 at 1255 hrs 

Approximately 11 miles north-east of Peterhead, Scotland 

Commercial Air Transport (Passenger) 
 
Crew -   2 
 
 
Crew -   2        (Fatal)       Passengers -   14      (Fatal)      

Passengers -    14 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Helicopter destroyed 

Airline Transport Pilot's Licence  

31 years 

2,575 hours (of which 1,870 were on type) 
Last 90 days - 96 hours 
Last 28 days - 37 hours 

AAIB Field Investigation 

The  helicopter  was  operating  a  return  scheduled  passenger  flight  from  Aberdeen  to  the  Miller  Oil 

Platform, situated in the North Sea approximately 145 nm north-east of Aberdeen.  When it arrived 
from  its  previous  flight  to  the  Bruce  Platform,  approximately  190  nm  north-east  of  Aberdeen,  a 
‘rotors running’ crew change was carried out.  The helicopter was serviceable except for a deferred 
defect  affecting  a  part  of  its  ice  detection  system.    The  daily  in-flight  checks  had  already  been 
completed  satisfactorily  by  the  off-going  crew.    The  helicopter  was  refuelled,  the  passengers 
boarded,  and  it  lifted  off  at  1040  hrs.    The  helicopter  landed  on  the  Miller  platform,  after  an 
uneventful  flight,  at  1149  hrs,  where  it  was  refuelled  again  with  the  rotors-running.    Fourteen 
passengers  boarded  the  helicopter  for  the  return  flight  to  Aberdeen  when  the  refuelling  was 
complete.    The  weather  conditions  were  benign  with  light  south  to  south-easterly  winds,  good 

visibility  with  generally  clear  skies  but  with  occasional  broken  cloud  at  5,000  to  6,000  ft.    Flying 
conditions were reported as smooth and the sea was calm. 

The helicopter lifted from the Miller Platform at 1203 hrs and climbed to 2,000 ft, tracking inbound 

towards Aberdeen.  Recorded information on the combined Cockpit Voice and Flight Data Recorder 

(CVFDR)  shows  that  the  crew  were  engaged  in  routine  cockpit  activities  and  there  were  no 

operational  abnormalities.    At  1254  hrs  the  co-pilot  made  a  routine  call  on  the  company  operating 

frequency  stating  that  the  helicopter  was  serviceable  and  the  ETA  was  1314  hrs.    Twelve  seconds 

later one of the pilots made  a brief  MAYDAY call on the ATC frequency.  This was followed by a 

similar  call,  that  included  some  position  information,  from  the  other  pilot.    The  radar  controller  at 

Aberdeen acknowledged the MAYDAY call and tried unsuccessfully to contact the crew of G-REDL.  

He then asked the crew of another helicopter, outbound on a similar routing, to examine the sea in 
the area of the last radar position. 

Recorded  radar  information  showed  the  aircraft  flying  inbound  towards  Aberdeen  at  2,000  ft, 

climbing momentarily to 2,200 ft and then turning right and descending rapidly.  Surface visibility 

was good and an eye witness, working on a supply vessel approximately 2 nm from the accident site, 

heard the helicopter and saw it descend rapidly before it hit the surface of the sea.  Immediately after 

impact he saw the four main rotor blades, still connected at their hub, strike the water.  Around this 

time, he also heard two bangs close together.  He immediately raised the alarm and the ship turned 

towards the accident site, which by now was marked by a rising column of grey then black smoke.  

The  ship  launched  a  fast  rescue  boat  whilst  making  way  towards  the  scene.    The  crew  of  the  fast 

rescue boat and the helicopter arrived promptly on the scene to discover an area of disturbed water, 

roughly 150 m in diameter containing debris from the helicopter.  Other search and rescue vessels, 

aircraft  and  helicopters  arrived  on  scene  within  40  minutes.    All  persons  on  board  were  fatally 
injured. 

The Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) was notified of the accident within minutes and a 

team of inspectors, including engineers, pilots and flight recorder specialists deployed to Aberdeen 

that  evening.    In  accordance  with  established  International  arrangements  the  Bureau  d'Enquetes  et 
d'Analyses Pour la Securitie de l'Aviation Civile (BEA), representing the State of Manufacture of the 
helicopter,  and  The  European  Aviation  Safety  Agency  (EASA),  the  Regulator  responsible  for  the 
certification and continued airworthiness of the helicopter, were informed of the accident.  The BEA 
appointed an Accredited Representative to lead a team of investigators from the BEA, Eurocopter - 
the  helicopter  manufacturer,  and  Turbomeca  -  the  engine  manufacturer.    The  EASA  and  the  UK 
Civil Aviation Authority also provided assistance to the AAIB team. 

Floating wreckage from the helicopter was brought ashore towards the end of the search and rescue 

phase.  As a priority, the CVFDR was located in the debris field and transported to the AAIB as soon 

as it was raised from the sea bed on Sunday 5 April 2009.  By Monday 6 April 2009 the helicopter 

fuselage with the engines and main rotor gear box attached, the separated rotor head with the main 

rotors  blades  still  attached  and  the  separated  tail  boom  had  been  recovered  from  the  sea  bed  and 

transported  to  the  AAIB  facilities  at  Farnborough,  Hampshire.    The  CVFDR  was  successfully 

downloaded  at  the  AAIB  and  contained  24  hours  of  flight  data  and  one  hour  of  cockpit  voice 

recording.    A  large  number  of  parameters  were  recorded  including  engine  data  and  some  system 

warnings  which  are  still  being  analysed.    The  CVFDR  recording  ceased  just  prior  to  the  first 
MAYDAY transmission. 

In  common  with  similar  helicopters  operating  in  the  North  Sea,  the  helicopter  was  additionally 

equipped  with  a  Health  and  Usage  Monitoring  System  (HUMS),  which  comprises  a  system  of 

sensors around the engines, airframe and drive train.  Recorded information includes vibration levels 

together with gearbox chip detection from a series of magnetic plugs.  The data accumulated during 

helicopter operations is transferred, usually on a daily basis, to the operator’s ground-based computer 

system.    The  data  is  then  subjected  to  mathematical  processes  that  establish  basic  signatures  and 

enable trends to be monitored for individual components.  The HUMS data for the day’s operation, 

including the accident flight, has also been recovered.  As the result of the discovery of a particle on 

the main rotor gearbox epicyclic module magnetic chip detector on 25 March a daily inspection of 

the epicyclic gearbox magnetic chip detector was initiated.  Also, the HUMS data was downloaded 

and analysed each time the helicopter returned to its base at Aberdeen for the next 25 flying hours.  
No further abnormalities were identified during this period.  

Examination of the wreckage indicates that the accident occurred following a catastrophic failure of 

the  main  rotor  gearbox  (MGB).    This  resulted  in  the  detachment  of  the  main  rotor  head  from  the 

helicopter and was rapidly followed by main rotor blade strikes on the pylon and tail boom, which 

became severed from the fuselage.  It is apparent that there was also a rupture in the right hand (No2) 

engine  casing,  in  the  plane  of  the  second  stage  power  turbine.    This  is  currently  believed  to  be  a 

secondary  feature.    Investigations  are  continuing  in  order  to  understand  completely  the  accident 
sequence.  

The  investigation  has  so  far  revealed  that  the  MGB  had  suffered  from  a  major  failure  within  the 
epicyclic module.  This is supported by HUMS data; however, this is not yet fully understood.  The 
examination of the MGB is continuing in conjunction with detailed analysis of the HUMS and other 
recorded information.   

Based  on  the  initial  findings  of  the  investigation  the  following  three  Safety  Recommendations  are 
made: 

Safety Recommendation 2009-048 

It  is  Recommended  that  Eurocopter  issue  an  Alert  Service  Bulletin  to  require  all  operators  of 

AS332L2  helicopters  to  implement  a  regime  of  additional  inspections  and  enhanced  monitoring  to 
ensure the continued airworthiness of the main rotor gearbox epicyclic module. 

Safety Recommendation 2009-049 

It is Recommended that the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) evaluate the efficacy of the 

Eurocopter programme of additional inspections and enhanced monitoring and, when satisfied, make 

the  Eurocopter  Alert  Service  Bulletin  mandatory  by  issuing  an  Airworthiness  Directive  with 
immediate effect. 

Safety Recommendation 2009-050 

It  is  Recommended  that  Eurocopter  improve  the  gearbox  monitoring  and  warning  systems  on  the 
AS332L2 helicopter so as to identify degradation and provide adequate alerts. 

 

