AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/02 

December 2002 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure During Lift Bag Operations 

Keywords:  Lifting 

A  member  has  reported  a  near-miss  during  a  lift  bag  operation,  which  highlights  the  dangers  of  inadequate  safe  rigging 
practice and of lack of awareness of actual lifting capacity of bags in relation to stated capacity. 

Saturation divers were operating at seabed level at 19 metres (62ft) and had to move a 600kg (1320lb) blind flange.  They had 
attached a lift bag, nominally rated at 500kg, to the load, so that they could manhandle it more easily into position. 

At some stage during the inflation process, the diver lost control and the lift bag, with attached flange, took off towards the 
surface.  When the bag arrived at the surface, it lost some of its volume, resulting in partial deflation.  Inevitably, the load fell 
back to the seabed, away from the dive site, and was later recovered, undamaged. 

It  was  fortunate  that  there  was  no  harm  to  the  divers  and  that  the  bag  did  not  become  fouled  in  the  support  vessel’s 
thrusters as it rose to the surface. 

The company involved has noted the following key issues: 

i) 

ii) 

All involved in this type of operation need to be aware that there is a potential variance between the stated capacity 
and actual capacity of lift bags.  In this case, the actual capacity was over 25% higher than the stated capacity; 

Rigging arrangements for lift bag operations should include an ‘inverter’ line, which must be connected between the top 
of the bag and a fixed anchor point on the seabed.  The length of the inverter line should be such that there is sufficient 
length to conduct the operational task, but that would it prevent the bag and load from reaching the ship or surface in 
the event that the bag did over-lift the load and initial control was lost.  When the restraint came on, the line would 
cause the bag to tip, spilling some air and returning the load to safety; 

iii)  When moving long spools, for example with multiple lift bags, it should be ensured that there are adequate anchoring 
points for each of the inverter lines, with the anchoring positions and lengths of ‘inverter’ lines suitably calculated to 
ensure a safe operation. 

2  Fatality During Lifting Operation 

Keywords:  Lifting 

We have been advised of the following fatality, which occurred on the pipe deck of an offshore platform. 

Two chemical pods had been stacked to make room for arriving cargo.  To improve overall deck safety, it was decided to 
unstack the pods during the next shift, since all cargo had arrived and space was available.  As this was a ‘blind’ lift, the crew 
included two flagmen/hookmen. 

One of the hookmen climbed up the integrated ladder on the side of the pods, in order to hook the chain sling.  During this 
operation, the crane pendant was lowered too much and went inside the frame holding the pod.  When the hookman told 
the crane driver to lift up approximately 20cm, the pendant snagged the frame and lifted one end of the pod.  As soon as one 
side of the tank had cleared the stacking lugs, the tank started to slide. 

 

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

iv) 

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

i) 

ii) 

The hookman had his upper body above the frame and, when the tank toppled, his chest was crushed between the falling pod 
and an adjacent container, stored approximately 2.6 metres from the pods.  The injuries to his chest were fatal and death 
was immediate. 

The company, in its investigations, noted that the deck had been surveyed by the crane driver prior to handover and that the 
deck had very well organised and managed.  However, it noted the following points which had contributed to this incident: 

Inadequate  design:    the pods  were  designed  for  stacking, but  the  lugs  did  not properly  prevent  sliding  if  subject  to 
external forces (e.g. crane, container).  The chain slings were also too short to allow hooking from deck level, which 
had been required in the company’s procedure for stacking to be allowed; 

Inadequate planning and worksite walk-through:  the safest way to perform the task had not been identified (the chain 
sling was hanging down the opposite side and there was no need to climb on top of the pod); 

Inadequate  identification  of  job  hazards:    working  at  heights  (4.6  metres  at  the  top  of  the  upper  pod)  and  not 
recognising the potential hazard of a trapped pendant; 

Inadequate communication:  the flagman could not see the top of the tank and hence could not direct the lowering of 
the crane pendant; the hookman was carrying out multiple tasks, including communication with the crane driver. 

The investigation resulted in the following recommendations being made: 

 

 

Stacking  of  these  pods  and  others  of  similar  design  to  be  banned  by  the  company;  consideration  to  be  given  to 
banning all stacking of containers; 

A pocket-sized aide-mémoire card to be introduced by the company, to prompt and aid appropriate prior assessment 
of lifts; 

Existing  company  rules  on  working  at  heights  to  be  properly  enforced  (working  on  a  ladder  above  2m  height  was 
already a violation of company rules); 

iv) 

Company rules on lifting to be clarified/changed: 

a) 

‘hooking at deck level’ means standing on the deck itself; 

b) 

flagman to be the only person communicating with the crane drive; flagman not to touch load; flagman to be 
identifiable by wearing a bright vest. 

The company has also stressed the following points to its employees: 

Design standards for stackable containers are to be clear; suitable design should be checked; 

Stacking  loads  where  people  have  to  work  is  inherently  dangerous  –  check  if  it’s  happening  on  your  worksite  and 
review whether or not it should continue; 

Safety Flash 

 

iii) 

v) 

vi) 

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

Lifting operations, while often routine activities, are inherently dangerous with people around – check that people are 
adequately separated from the hazard; review how to recognise when a lift becomes non-routine; 

iv)  Working at height above 2m without adequate controls/safeguards in place is against company policy (‘prohibited’) – 

check it’s not happening on your worksite; 

Flagmen/banksmen should never be put in a position to handle a load – check that they’re not on your worksite; 

‘Safety must be 100%.  Be intolerant, small deviations will eventually combine and hurt you’. 

3  Filter Failure in Diver Gas Reclaim Boosters 

Keywords:  Gas 

A member has reported the following near-miss incident, whereby a diver experienced narcotic effects, possibly due to the 
effect of additional filters being placed in a gas reclaim system which obstructed free gas flow within the system. 

Additional filters had been fitted in the booster gas circuit – upstream of the bypass regulator, in line with the booster bypass 
circuit – with the intention of protecting the regulator seat from the effects of Teflon dust emanating from the piston rings. 

However, the insertion of the specific type of filter may have caused an obstruction to free gas flow between the outlet and 
the inlet of the compressors.  If the compressors were run in ‘bypass’ mode (i.e. while the divers were not on closed circuit), 
there would be a risk of compromising the safe operation and reliability of the equipment, because the potential would exist 
for small quantities of air to be drawn into the reclaim system via the first stage piston top set of cross-head chevron seals. 

The following advice has been issued by the member to its dive ships/sites. 

Carry  out  a  full  system  inspection  of  the  booster  bypass  pipework,  specifically  that  area  between  the  compressor 
outlet  and  its  inlet,  to  determine  that  no  in-line  filter  or  other  potential  obstruction  has  been  installed  and  that 
pipework has not been modified in any other way; 

Remove any such items from service until the modification has been fully assessed and written approval given by the 
responsible company department; 

Check that inter-stage gauges are fully operational and in working order (they should give a tell-tale signal if a flow 
restriction exists); 

iv) 

Check that the compressor running temperature is normal while running for extended periods in the ‘bypass’ mode. 

The attached note provides details of defects identified by the US Coast Guard in antennae on EPIRBs (emergency position 
indicating radio beacons), caused by internal corrosion. 

4  EPIRB Antenna Failures 

Keywords:  Corrosion 

5  Saturn Engine Safety Notice 

Keywords:  Explosion 

We  have  been  passed  the  attached  ‘Product  Advisory’  from  Solar  Turbines,  relating  to  a  potential  personnel  safety  issue 
resulting from an uncontained compressor section failure, which could involve risk of damage to property and serious bodily 
injury or death. 

 

Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection 
SAFETY ALERT - EPIRB ANTENNAE FAILURES 

September 10, 2002     Washington, DC 

 
The USCG Marine Safety Office Honolulu has recently reported that a high 
percentage of antennas equipped to Satellite 406 Cat I EPIRBs, product number 
2754, manufactured by ACR Electronics Incorporated have failed during 
dockside examinations of Commercial Fishing Vessels.  
 
 
 
On several occasions the antenna's outer rubber coating was discovered ripped or 
torn. Closer inspection often revealed extensive internal corrosion. Other 
antennas showed no perforations on the outer rubber coating but displayed 
bulges on the antennae near its base. Upon closer inspection when the bulging 
area was sliced open, total wastage of the antennae interior was revealed.  
 
It is reported that evidence of a corrosion failure may be discovered when the 
antenna is unscrewed from the EPIRB body assembly. Rusty liquid dripping 
from the antenna or moisture present inside the threaded section are tell tale 
signs of failing equipment.  
 
ACR Electronics has acknowledged receipt of the failed antennas and has 
initiated a study to determine the cause and scope of the problem. ACR is 
committed to support its safety products and will replace damaged antennas at 
no cost to the owner. Should you encounter similar problems with your vessel's 
2754 EPIRB antenna, contact ACR Electronics Customer Service 
Representatives at (800) 432-0227, ext. 110 to receive a replacement antenna.  
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommend s that vessel operators carefully inspect 
their EPIRB antennas - particularly if it is manufactured by ACR Electronics 
Incorporated. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

PRODUCT ADVISORY

NOTICE:

The  Type  of  Change  and  Recommended  Compliance  specified
reflects Solar's best judgment regarding this Product  Advisory.  All
questions  should  be  directed  to  your  local  Solar  District  Office.
Solar, Saturn, Centaur, Taurus, Mercury, Mars, Titan, SoLoNOx, and
Turbotronic are trademarks of Solar Turbines Incorporated. Cat and
Caterpillar  are  trademarks  of  Caterpillar  Inc.  Specifications  subject
to change without notice

 8.7/112
March 2002

Saturn
All

Product Safety

NUMBER:
ISSUED:
REVISED:
PRODUCT:
MODEL(S):
Specifics:
SUBJECT:

Type of Change:
Recommended
Compliance:

Purpose:

 .

SATURN ENGINE SAFETY NOTICE

Immediate
To alert users to a potential personnel safety issue resulting from an uncontained
compressor  section  failure,  which  may  involve  risk  of  damage  to  property  and
serious bodily injury or death.

GENERAL INFORMATION:
This  Product  Advisory  is  intended  to  inform  users  of  an  incident  that  is  currently  under
investigation  by  Solar  Turbines  Incorporated.    The  information  contained  herein  is  not
final.    When  the  investigation  is  completed,  you  will  receive  supplemental  information  in
the form of an updated Product Advisory or a Service Bulletin. The Type of Change and
Recommended Compliance specified reflects Solar's best judgment regarding the Product
Advisory. All questions should be directed to your Solar Field Service District Manager.

There  are  currently  over  2100  Saturn  10  single-shaft  engines  operating  in  power  generation
applications worldwide with approximately 174 million total operating hours.

During  March  2002,  a  Solar  Saturn  10  single-shaft  gas  turbine  experienced  an  uncontained
compressor section failure at a customer site, which resulted in metal fragments penetrating the
compressor casing.  Initial reports were that this resulted in a fatality.  The reported equipment
damage was limited to the Saturn package.

Solar  has  initiated  a  failure  investigation  of  this  incident.    Solar  will  provide  additional
information  to  users  by  way  of  an  updated  Product  Advisory  when  all  relevant  data  has  been
analyzed and the root cause(s) have been determined.  Any operational recommendations will be
communicated in a Service Bulletin.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION FOR OTHER SATURN USERS:

Solar Turbines is issuing this Product Advisory to all owners of Saturn single-shaft hot-end-drive
generator packages.  While this incident occurred on this model of Saturn, the root cause(s) is not
known, and under investigation.  Thus, this Advisory is also being sent to owners of all Saturn
engines, including the two-shaft mechanical drive version.  Solar is unaware of any uncontained
compressor section failures involving two-shaft engines.  Until a final Service Bulletin is issued,
users  of  all  Saturn  engines  are  advised  to  comply  with  the  actions  required  by  this  Product
Advisory.

ACTION REQUIRED:

FAILURE TO TAKE THIS ACTION COULD RESULT IN DAMAGE TO PROPERTY

AND SERIOUS BODILY INJURY OR DEATH.

! WARNING !

Solar  recommends  that  in  order  to  avoid  possible  injury  to  personnel,  users  are  cautioned  to
advise all personnel to avoid the area adjacent to the compressor section during an engine start
and  while  the  engine  is  in  operation.    See  Figure  1  for  the  locations  of  the  engine  area  to  be
avoided.

Users  are  also  advised  to  ensure  that  all  maintenance  checks  are  performed  on  all  package
systems  including  control  system  and  safety  shutdowns,  vibration  monitoring,  fuel,  and  fire
systems and ensure that all are operating properly as set forth in your Operation and Maintenance
Manuals.

AREA TO
BE AVOIDED

Figure 1.  Typical Saturn 10 Generator Set

