AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/13 

Safety Flash 

April 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Explosion Causing Fatal Injury During Maintenance of Metocean Buoy 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crewman  was  fatally  injured  during  the  recovery  and  maintenance  of  a 
metocean buoy, after it had been in use in-sea for a period of around two years. The incident occurred after the buoy was 
recovered onto a service vessel for cleaning.  After retrieval onto the service vessel, the buoy was cleaned, and the task of 
opening the instrument compartment started. This compartment also held the lead-acid battery packs of the buoy. Access 
was gained by removing a circular lid secured by 16 bolts. The removal of the bolts had been completed, except for the last 
bolt which proved to be seized. The decision was made to free this bolt using an angle grinder.  

Only moments after applying the grinder, an explosion took place which resulted in the lid blowing open and the instrument 
modules and their mounting plate being projected outwards with great force. These items struck the crewman, causing him 
to be fatally injured. 

The buoy had a discus shaped hull that could be split in two to ease transportation. A keel with counterweight was mounted 
under the hull to stabilise the buoy. A cylinder in the middle of the hull contains all electronic modules, the power package 
and  the  wave  sensor.  The  different  electronic  modules  were  mounted  into  special  splash  proof  compartment  boxes  to 
secure safe handling of the sensitive electronics. The buoy was equipped with a mast to support the meteorological sensors 
and the communication antennae. The dimensions in the diagram below are in millimetres. 

Line drawing of metocean buoy 

 

The  immediate  cause  of  the  explosion  was  found,  on  investigation,  to  be  sparks  from  the  grinder  igniting  an  explosive 
mixture of hydrogen and oxygen which had built up inside the compartment. The hydrogen build-up was assumed to stem 
from the lead-acid batteries. The lead-acid batteries contained in all  metocean buoys of this sort are of the so called valve 
regulated  type,  meaning  that  they  are  sealed,  except  for  a  pressure  relief  valve.  These  batteries  feature  a  built-in  gas 
recombination  system,  and  the  small  amounts  of  gas  released  through  the  valve  pass  through  an  additional  catalyst  before 
being conveyed to the outside of the buoy. This system is intended to prevent any build-up of hydrogen. The final technical 
investigation showed no sign of malfunction of the battery venting system. 

The  root  cause  of  the  incident  was  determined  to  be  to  a  combination  of  lack  of  maintenance  and  a  failure  to  follow 
existing  procedures.  The  investigation  concluded  that  the  following  chain  of  events  led  to  the  hydrogen  build-up,  and 
eventually the accident. 

 
1.  Corrosion around lid sealing due to bird droppings and rain or sea spray caused the sealing to fail; 

2.  Water, sea salt and bird dropping (guano) ingression into the instrument compartment past the leaking lid sealing; 

3.  Corrosion and subsequent volume increase on details of battery rack due to ingression; 

4. 

Increased pressure on batteries from rack, resulting in cracked battery cases; 

5.  Hydrogen build up due to one or more of these effects; 

6.  Corrosion of aluminium, accelerated by guano and sea salts dissolved in water; 

7.  Corrosion due to spilled battery acid from cracked batteries; 

8.  Gas leakage from cracked battery cases; 

9.  Hydrogen escapes due to leaking lid sealing and increasing temperature; 

10.  Grinder ignites hydrogen. 

The following further points were noted: 

  The existing user documentation for these metocean buoys states that the buoys have to be purged before opening the 
lid  to  the  instrument  compartment.  The  buoys  incorporate  valves  to  allow  for  this  procedure.  In  this  incident  this 
procedure was not followed; 

  There was a warning in the manual against ignition sources; 

  There were instructions in the manual on purging the instrument compartment;  

  A  protective  cover  over  the  instrument  compartment  lid  and  also  bird  spikes  (to  prevent  birds  landing  on  the  buoy) 

were available and were to be fitted at that time. 

The following actions were taken:    

 

Improvements to warning signs and clearer instructions were developed, and also improved designs for the instrument 
compartment and battery rack; 

  Development of clearer instructions, which emphasize that at all times the buoys should be treated with the assumption 

that they could contain an explosive gas mixture. 

The following precautions have now been identified:  

  Exercise particular care with buoys that have not operated normally in the period prior to retrieval; 

  Equalise the pressure inside the buoy to the ambient air pressure by opening the gas filling valves;  

  Purge  the  interior  of  the  buoy  with  air  or  nitrogen  in  order  to  remove  any  possibility  of  hydrogen  gas,  using  the 

procedure described in the user manual; 

  Do not allow any ignition source - including power tools - near the buoy until it is fully opened;   

  Maintain a safe distance. Only the minimum required number of persons should be in the vicinity of the buoy until it is 

fully opened. Never stand in direct line of the instrument compartment lid; 

  When flushing has been completed, proceed immediately with the opening of the lid; 

  Leave the lid fully open for a further 10 minutes. 

2 

  Battery Damage Caused by Charger Failure 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  report  regarding  damage  to  batteries  caused  by  the  failure  of  the 
charger. The incident occurred when an engineer was carrying out planned maintenance of emergency generator. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.02.pdf  

3  Near Miss: Exposed Live Electrical Cable     

A member has reported an incident in which a live electrical cable was found exposed. The incident occurred when a vessel 
had  returned  to  service  after  a  long  dry  docking.  During  this  period  many  parts  of  the  vessel  were  worked  on  and 
modifications  to  the  layout  of  the  vessel  were  made  to  accommodate  new  equipment  -  in  particular  the  fast  rescue  craft 
(FRC) and its associated launching davit were removed in order to make room for a new hyperbaric lifeboat (HLB).  

 
A member of the crew working near the new hyperbaric lifeboat noticed an electrical cable which was coiled up and stowed 
between  a  handrail  and  an  adjacent  bulkhead.  The  ends  of  the  cable  were  not  terminated  but  had  been  separated  and 
wrapped up in electrical insulating tape. It was noted that a small amount of smoke was coming from the end of the cable and 
some  sparking  (the  cable  was  in  contact  with  the  bulkhead).  Realising  that  the  cable  was  live  the  crewman  immediately 
contacted  the  deck  electrician  and  asked  him  to  come  and  investigate.  The  electrician  subsequently  traced  the  cable  and 
made it safe. The cable was identified as the supply to a halogen flood light originally intended as overboard illumination for 
the launch station of the vessel’s FRC. 

Figure: showing electrical cable and bare live wires 

 

The company’s investigation revealed the following: 

  There had been inadequate planning and inadequate supervision of the work; 

  The old flood lamp had been removed with no Permit To Work (PTW) or Electrical Isolation (EI) certificates in place. 

The underlying causes associated with the incident were: 

  Owing  to  the  high  workload  of  vessel  staff  and  the  large  number  of  jobs  being  undertaken  simultaneously,  there  had 
been  a  failure  of  control,  in  that  it  had  not  been  possible  for  ship’s  officers  to  observe  all  tasks  and  thus  ensure  that 
vessel policies were followed;   

  There was no evidence to suggest that any communication was made to ship yard fitters that live electrical supplies were 

  There had been inadequate planning ahead of  the  job being undertaken; not all power supplies in  the  work area were 

still present within their work area; 

assessed or isolated; 

  All  services  that  were  required  to  be  isolated  and  removed  prior  to  the  area  being  handed  over  to  the  third  party 
contractor for the installation of the HLB had been successfully completed. The requirement to remove the overboard 
light was not part of this original scope of work; 

  The third-party contractor deviated from their original work scope and removed the flood lamp without the necessary 

PTW and EI in place; 

  The third-party contractor did not follow the Management of Change procedure. 

Our member identified the following lessons: 

Management of Change procedures; 

  The  induction  to  the  vessel  during  dry  dock  is  to  be  reviewed  and  will  include  additional  information  regarding  the 

  The use of a single point of contact for each work area was not in place while the vessel was in dry dock. This would 
have  allowed  the  third-party  contractor  to  approach  their  contact  and  arrange  the  necessary  PTW  and  EI  for  the 
additional works they required; 

  Although  this  work  area  still  had  additional  works  to  be  carried  out,  the  area  was  not  fully  surveyed  once  the  initial 

works had been completed prior to handover. 

Further information on shipyard safety can be found in IMCA SEL 032/M 221 Guidance on safety in shipyards. 

 
4  Finger and Hand Injuries 

A member has reported two incidents in which crew suffered finger or hand injuries.  

In  the  first  incident,  the  injured  person  was  preparing  a 
meal  in  the  galley.  He  placed  a  chopping  board  on  a 
worktop and placed a knife on top of the chopping board. 
As  he  moved  around  the  galley,  carrying  out  various 
tasks,  the  knife  slipped  from  the  chopping  board  and 
landed  with  the  blade  protruding  over  the  edge  of  the 
worktop.  The  injured  person  was  unaware  of  this  and 
while  walking  past  the  worktop  his  right  hand  made 
contact  with  the  blade  of  the  knife,  causing  a  2  cm 
laceration  to  the  fleshy  part  of  the  hand,  between  the 
base  of  his  thumb  and  index  finger.  The  wound  was 
cleaned  and  closed  with  three  sutures.  The  injured 
person resumed normal duties the following day. 

In  the  second  incident,  the  injured  person  was  working  in  the 
Bell Hangar. At the time of the incident an external auditor was 
carrying out an audit of the dive system. As part of the audit the 
diving  bell  was  required  to  be  moved  over  the  access  and 
inspection pit. Once the bell was transferred over the access pit 
two  axle  stands  were  placed  under  the  bell’s  bump  frame.  The 
first  axle  stand  was  required  to  be  adjusted  for  height;  during 
this adjustment the injured persons’ right index finger got nipped 
in the extension mechanism. This resulted in an injury to the tip 
of  the  right  index  finger,  which  the  injured  person  initially 
considered trivial and finished his work task. On examination his 
finger  was  bleeding  and  when  reported  to  the  medic  a 
protective dressing was applied. 

Figure: 2 cm laceration caused by knife blade 

the axle stand 

 

Figure: Illustration of where finger was pinched during adjustment of 

 

The  company’s  investigation  revealed  that  the  root 
causes of the incident were: 

The company’s investigation revealed that the root causes of the 
incident were: 

  The  cook  was  attempting  to  undertake  too  many 
tasks at the same time whilst working alone at a busy 
time; 

  Assistance  from  other  team  members  was  not 

  Because  they  deemed  the  activity  to  be  routine,  persons 
doing the  task did not communicate the need to move the 
dive bell and therefore there was no supervisory support in 
place at the time; 

sought during a busy period in the galley; 

  No  Task  Based  Risk  Assessment  (TBRA)  or  toolbox  talk  / 

  Existing  safety  systems  were  not  followed,  i.e.  knife 
handling  policy  and  Task  Based  Risk  Assessment 
(TBRA). 

pre-task assessment was carried out; 

  The team involved in the task failed to consider conducting 

risk assessment as a priority before carrying out the task. 

The company’s investigation included a review of both incidents to identify whether there was any commonality between the 
root causes of both incidents. Some of the lessons learnt include: 

  Ask for help if and when required – especially working in potentially hazardous areas (bell garage) and / or busy working 

areas (galley during meal service times); 

  Appropriate supervision/supervisory support is essential in ensuring policies and safe methods of work/working tools are 

used;  

  Supervisors should be informed of any hazardous activities being undertaken, before starting, to ensure adequate levels 
of additional personnel and / or supervision is provided to ensure HSE policies and management system requirement are 
applied; 

  Safety policies and safe systems of work are put in place to assist in the protection of people, the environment, plant and 
equipment etc. Failure to comply with these has a detrimental effect on safety and can lead to instances of injury, damage 
or loss as demonstrated by the two finger injury incidents; 

 

Inadequate planning and risk assessing work tasks can result in potential hazards and control measures being overlooked.  

 
5  High Potential Near Miss During Equipment Testing 

A member has reported an incident in which a heavy metal work table was dragged nearly a metre by a forklift truck. The 
incident  occurred  during  troubleshooting  of  a  heavy  duty  multi-strand  electrical  cable.  Technicians  connected  the  cable 
between a metal worktable vice and the rear towing / pull pin of a forklift truck, in order to allow stretching and tensioning 
of the cable. Once the stretched cable was tested, the tension was released and the forklift truck shut down. The cable was 
not disconnected from either the worktable vice or the forklift. A short time later, another employee boarded the forklift 
truck,  started  the  engine  and  began  to  drive  away.  The  cable  jerked  taught  and  pulled  the  metal  worktable  forward 
approximately 1m before warning shouts were recognized and the forklift was stopped.  

No personnel were injured and no equipment was damaged. However, the potential for personnel to have been injured and 
equipment to have been damaged was  very high had personnel been at the work table or had the work table been pulled 
over. At the time of the incident  there were a number of costly pieces of electronic equipment on the work bench. 

  

  

 

Figures: (Left) Work bench (Middle) electrical cable being tested (Right) Fork lift truck 

The company’s investigation revealed the following: 

  There were no test procedures for the set-up and use of the forklift for stretching and tensioning the cable; 

  There was no job safety analysis (JSA) addressing actual or potential hazards of stretching and tensioning the cable with 

the forklift in order to support troubleshooting of the electrical cable; 

  The electrical cable had not been removed from either the worktable vice or the forklift once the tensioning had been 

completed; 

  There was inadequate communications between employees – no communication took place between the personnel using 

the forklift for testing and the operator who sought to drive the forklift from the area;  

  The operator who boarded the forklift did not inspect or walk around the vehicle before starting up and driving away; 

  There were inadequate guards or barriers – the forklift had not been secured to prevent access (i.e., no warning signs, 

labels, the key had not been removed from the ignition, etc.); 

  The testing of the cable was rushed to completion without a thorough review of all aspects of equipment, personnel and 

process. 

Further investigation revealed the following root causes: 

 

Inadequate leadership/supervision – Proper management of the overall testing process, equipment, and personnel would 
have  prevented  this  near  miss  incident.  Contributing  factors  to  this  root  cause  include  inadequate  work  planning, 
inadequate  identification  and  evaluation  of  the  potential  loss/hazards/risks,  and  inadequate  or  missing  documentation 
(JSA, procedures, and/or instructions, etc.) which would have provided better control of work; 

  Poor communication between peers – No communications took place between the operator and the using department 

before the operator started the forklift and drove away; 

 

Improper motivation – The failure of the operator to visually check the status of the forklift prior to use demonstrated 
complacency with the dangers and hazards of forklift operations. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Testing methods, especially when unique or uncommon, should be documented and a Job Safety Analysis performed to 

ensure all hazards and risks are identified, understood and mitigated against; 

  Controls for equipment, personnel and process should be planned, defined and monitored for compliance by assigned, 

responsible personnel; 

 
  Ensured  that  improved  communication  processes  were  established  and  maintained  to  prevent  recurrence  of  same  or 

  Continued to reinforce safety protocols, practices and behaviours with all personnel to overcome complacency to work 

similar incidents; 

place hazards.   

6  Pressure Switch Location for Fixed Fire Suppression Systems  

The United States Coast Guard has published the following report regarding an engine room fire in a vessel. The safety alert 
addresses  the  location  of  fire  suppression  system  pressure  switches  aboard  vessels.  These  critical  components  sense  the 
activation of the system and then electrically secure the ventilation systems operating in the protected space. Securing the 
ventilation is essential in extinguishing a fire onboard a vessel. It assists in isolating the fire within the space, minimizes the 
introduction of additional oxygen to fuel the fire and prevents the loss of fire suppression agents from the space. 

Recently, a vessel with an installed fixed CO2 fire suppression system suffered extensive damage due to a fire that started in 
the engine room. During the fire-fighting efforts the crew reported that the engine room ventilation could not be secured. A 
post incident damage survey of the vessel revealed that the pressure switch used to secure the ventilation was located within 
the engine room.   

Members may wish to check the location of these switches onboard their vessels, and ensure that they are properly located. 

The report can be downloaded from www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/TVNCOE/Documents/SafetyAlerts/PressureSwitch.pdf  

