Safety Flash 

November 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 29/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This safety flash comprises two incidents relating to vessel stability and watertight integrity, an incident relating to 
items  falling  from  a  crane,  and  then,  two  similar  recent  incidents  involving  water  bottles  that  were  used 
inappropriately as chemical containers.  Only one of them was a near miss. 

1 

Loss of Tow and Subsequent Foundering of Two Vessels 

What happened 

The Danish Maritime Accident Investigation Board (DMAIB) published a 
Marine  accident  report  on  Mærsk  Battler's  loss  of  tow  and  the 
foundering of Mærsk Searcher and Mærsk Shipper in the Bay of Biscay on 
the  night  between  21  and  22  December  2016.    Mærsk  Searcher  and 
Mærsk Shipper were configured in a side-by-side towing setup.  During 
the passage, the fenders between the vessels on tow failed, and the vessels started to interact. This caused damage 
to the superstructure, which eventually compromised the watertight integrity of Mærsk Searcher and led to water 
ingress.  She capsized and sank, and subsequently Mærsk Shipper was pulled under also.  The crew of the towing 
vessel Mærsk Battler carried out a controlled breakage of the towing wire and came loose of the foundered towage. 

The DMAIB regards the foundering of the two vessels as 
 

… a systemic accident. This means that local and technical circumstances unfolding on board  Mærsk Battler 
during the voyage cannot be isolated from the preceding organisational events and circumstances taking place 
months earlier. Thus, the investigation of the foundering of Mærsk Searcher and Mærsk Shipper is two-fold. 
It focuses on the technical circumstances leading to the foundering of the two ships and on the organisational 
circumstances facilitating these technical circumstances. 

It is concluded in the report that the loss of fenders, collision and flooding of the unmanned ships under tow had 
been addressed in the risk assessment carried out, and that risk mitigating initiatives were in place for each risk 
item. However, these initiatives were ineffective. The DMAIB concludes that the risk mitigating strategies were 
mainly  focused  on  preventing  risk  factors  in  isolation  and  left  little  or  no  contingency  for  acute  interaction 
between the risk factors. 

A full marine accident report has been prepared in English and is available here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Don’t lose your tow in heavy weather 

  Tug capsized during operations 

 

 

 
2  USCG: Remain Upright by Fully Understanding Vessel Stability 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published Safety Alert 11-17 
relating  to vessel  stability and  watertight  integrity.    Recently,  a marine 
casualty involving a fishing vessel in the Bering Sea resulted in multiple 
fatalities and complete loss of the vessel. 

The Coast Guard notes: 
 

A  Marine  Board  of  Investigation  is  currently  analyzing  the  various 
circumstances surrounding the casualty.  Although the investigation is 
not complete, testimony and fact finding indicate that vessel owners, 
operators, and crews should give special consideration to vessel stability concerns. 

The need for operators to understand their vessel’s Stability Instructions (SI) cannot be overstated. It is important 
to understand the document. Operators and crew should seek out opportunities to further their knowledge of 
stability via courses, training, workshops, and visits from Naval Architects. They should also take advantage of 
other various  initiatives,  both mandatory and voluntary,  to discuss and compare a vessel’s current SI to the 
actual  loaded  condition  prior  to  departing  port.  An  independent  review  of  a  vessel’s  loaded  condition, 
equipment, and operations can often provide important insights. 

  Confirming the accuracy of stability instructions in the context of conversion or change; 

The Coast Guard provides guidance on: 

  Steps to significantly reduce the risk of capsizing; 

  The risk of icing adding to dangerous instability. 

The full Coastguard Safety Alert 11-17 can be found here. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Watertight doors left open at sea 

3  Dropped Object: Window Fell from Crane Cabin 

What happened 

A window came loose from the crane operator’s cabin on a DSV, and fell approximately 4m to deck.  No one was 
injured.  It happened when, during a pause in crane operations, the crane boom was slewed away from personnel 
working on deck, and the crane operator asked to stand by for further instructions. 

 

 

 

 
While waiting, he noticed a grease stain on the outside of the cabin wind shield.  He opened the cabin upper window 
from the inside, in order to make it easier to clean the stain, when the hinges failed and the window fell out and 
down to the main deck.  The crane operator immediately shouted to deck personnel to watch themselves as the 
window was falling down.  Everyone got clear; no one was hurt as no one was under the crane cabin at that time. 
Our member held a “safety stand down” and a dropped object hazard hunt was conducted on the main deck. 

What went wrong/causes 

The hinges on the crane window failed, and the window fell out.  Causal factors include: 

 

 

Inadequate design/construction of window/crane cabin; 

Inadequate maintenance/inspection of the crane window/crane cabin; 

  Awareness of working at height, or of dropped object risks, may not extend to commonly unnoticed parts of 

the infrastructure of the vessel, platform or even of buildings, for example, windows. 

Actions taken: 

  Review, design and propose a new upper window hinge connection. This will apply to any other window hinge 

connections that are identical or similar; 

  Develop checklist to address the inspection of windows, doors and hinge connections elsewhere; 

  Correspond with the window/hinge manufacturer on the deeper causes of the hinges failing. 

Parts, pieces, or debris falling from cranes – for whatever reason – remains a significant cause of dropped object 
reports amongst IMCA members. 

Browse  to  https://www.imca-int.com/alerts/search-safety-flash/?swpquery=crane+dropped  for  a  list  of  IMCA 
safety flash incidents relating to objects dropped from cranes. 

4  Unlabelled Containers: Chemicals Stored in Drinking Water Bottles 

What happened 

One of our members has noted a trend of chemicals being decanted into unlabelled clear plastic water bottles of 
the sort commonly used for drinking water, and persons have assumed the chemicals to be water and taken a drink 
from  the  bottle.    Our  member  noted  two  recent  cases;  in  one  case,  a  person  ingested  a  small  amount  of  the 
chemical; in the other, a person took a sip from the bottle but did not swallow any chemical. 

 

Water bottle in the position at 
the time of incident (NB there 
was no red tag on it at the time 

Close up of the bottle showing 

that the contents (Loctite SF7063) 

looked like water 

 

 
Examples of appropriate containers for 

decanting chemicals 

What went wrong/causes 

  Poor hazard awareness; 

 

 

Inappropriate and inadequate management of chemicals, putting the health and safety of employees at risk. 

 
Storing chemicals in unlabelled containers presents an avoidable risk, especially when chemicals are placed into 
containers  such  water  bottles  or  soft  drinks  bottles.    Accidental  poisoning  could  result  in  serious  harm.  
If unidentified chemicals are  accidentally ingested, medical staff may not  be able to administer the  appropriate 
treatment in a timely manner, with potentially fatal consequences. 

Lessons learnt 

  Chemicals are often ordered in bulk quantities and may  arrive  in containers that are too large or heavy for 
everyday use.  Subsequently the chemicals may be transferred to smaller containers that are easier to manage; 

 

If it is necessary to decant chemicals from their original containers: 
  Always decant the chemicals in the chemical storage area 
  Use a container in good condition, of type appropriate for the chemical 
  Ensure that both containers are clearly labelled.  The labels should be clean and legible and should include: 

full product name 

- 
-  Manufacturer name 
- 

safety data sheet (SDS) reference 

  Do not use bottles normally used for, or associated with, drinking water 
  Wear the correct personal protective equipment including gloves and protective eyewear; 

  Storage of chemicals should be in accordance with the SDS and in a designated and properly controlled storage 

location; 

  Persons  dealing  with  chemicals  should  be  fully  aware  of  relevant  SDS  information  and  local  regulatory 

requirements such as the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH (UK)). 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident: 

  Person accidentally drank hazardous substance 

  Person accidentally drank hazardous substance: Unmarked bottle 

5  Near Miss: Water Bottles Reused for Fuel Storage 

What happened 

During a vessel inspection, plastic water bottles were discovered being reused 
to  store  diesel  on  board  a  fast  rescue  craft  (FRC).    There  was  no  proper 
labelling  or  means  of  substance  identification.    The  bottles  were  emptied 
subsequently and discarded accordingly. A safety stand down was held with 
the crew. 

What went wrong/causes 

 

Inappropriate  management  and  handling  of  flammable  liquid  –  water 
bottles used not for their intended purpose, but for storage of diesel fuel 
without any proper labelling; 

  The storage of fuel oil or other chemical substances in drinking water containers was a ‘usual’ practice for the 

crew due to alleged unavailability of special containers on board; 

 

Lack  of  safety  awareness:  the  potential  risks  of  fire  or  spill,  and  the  possible  consequences  to  the  crew 
members, environment and to the vessel, were not identified, nor properly assessed. 

  All flammable and combustible liquids should be stored in a designated storage area in special containers with 

sufficient ventilation means in line with SDS indicated storage requirements; 

Lessons learnt/Actions taken 

 

 
  Water  bottles  should  not  be  reused.  There  have  been  and  are  incidents  in  the  industry  of  accidental 

consumption of fuel, thinners and other substances, due to water bottles being reused for other substances; 

  Vessel management should identify requirements for appropriate and suitable containers for chemical storage, 

observing regulatory and operational requirements, and arrange delivery as necessary; 

  Full  crew  discussion  and  review  of  risks  associated  with  inadequate  handling/storage  of  flammable  and 

hazardous substances. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

  Person accidentally drank hazardous substance 

  Person accidentally drank hazardous substance: Unmarked bottle 

 

