AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/12 

Safety Flash 

September 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1 

Inadvertent Lowering of Lifeboat  

A member has reported an incident in which a lifeboat was inadvertently lowered to sea.  The incident occurred during an 
unrelated lifting operation to move a steel plate.  This was taking place during high winds, and one of the tag lines being used 
caught on the port lifeboat release wire, releasing the gravity brake and causing the boat to be lowered to sea.  The lifeboat 
did  not  disconnect  from  the  falls  and  was  winched  back  up  to  the  davits  without  damage.    There  were  no  injuries  to 
personnel. 

Cable release wire that was fouled by the tag line, pressure applied and caused de-activation of gravity brake 

 

 

The outer sleeve of this tagline created a snagging hazard 

 

Investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The hazard created by the high wind was not fully recognised, and the opportunity to call a time out was not taken.  The 

potential to snag the lifeboat release wire had not been recognised during the risk assessment; 

♦  Although the taglines in use were of the tangle free type, the textile covering of the upper body of the line had become 

loose and retracted causing a snagging point to occur.  This caught the release line and deactivated the brake; 

♦  When the brake drum was opened for inspection, a large amount of oil residue was found on the brake lining, having 
seeped  past  the  seals  from  the  adjacent  oil  sump.    The  oil  sump  was  overfilled  beyond  the  manufacturers’ 
recommendations.  The oil on the brake linings reduced the efficiency of the brake to reset when the counterweight was 
reapplied. 

The following actions were taken following the incident:  

♦  Deeper consideration of all conditions during risk assessment.  For example, how did the controls to manage the steel 

plate introduce other hazards in this event? 

♦ 

Inspection of tag lines to ensure they were fit for purpose, and holding of spares onboard;  

♦  Review of lifeboat maintenance particularly with regard to the gravity brake; 

♦  Checking oil levels were correct and that personnel understood the use of level plugs. 

2  Near Miss: Cement Tank Hatch Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which the hatch on a cement tank failed under pressure.  The incident occurred when 
the cement tank was being pressurised to verify the integrity of the system prior to loading dry bulk during a forthcoming 
port call.  Following the pressurisation of the cement tank to approximately 4 bar, a loud bang was heard and the cement 
tank pressure was rapidly lost. 

Fortunately,  no  one  was  present  within  the  cement  room  at  the  time  and  there  were  no  injuries.    This  incident  was 
considered a high potential near miss. Had any persons been in the cement space at the time of the incident, the potential for 
a serious injury was high. 

Cement tank hatch 

Nuts replacing dogs 

 

 

Showing personnel access restricted by dogs 

 

 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The  original  cement  tank  hatch  securing  dogs  had  been  removed  and  replaced  by  nuts.    When  this  replacement  had 

taken place was not known; 

♦ 

It  was  discovered  that  the  most  likely  reason  for  the  change  of  the  securing  dogs  with  nuts  was  to  provide  greater 
clearance for personnel access between the cement tank hatch and the pillar; 

♦  Although the cement tank hatch thread bar was 27mm, the diameter of the nuts was 30mm and, although of a differing 

size, it was still possible to secure these 30mm nuts on the 27mm thread bar; 

♦  The change had not been properly documented or dealt with through a “management of change” process; 

Our member reported that a thorough investigation of this high potential incident is currently being undertaken and that the 
detailed findings from this investigation will be revealed in due course. 

3  LTI Hand Cut During Cutting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a welder badly cut his hand using a hand-held circular cutting tool.  The incident 
occurred when a sub-contractor welder was cutting off an air vent in preparation for further welding work. Shortly after he 
started work, there was a loud shout and the chief mate rushed to him to find out that the welder has cut his palm all the 
way to his two fingers.  First aid treatment was administered before he was taken to hospital for surgery.  It was confirmed 
that two of his finger bones and veins were broken and cut off respectively. 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

♦  The welder was rushing to finish the job; 

protective guard. 

♦  The welder had been through job hazard analysis (JHA) training on the morning of the day of the incident; 

♦  The  welder  replaced  the  blade  in  his  cutting  machine  but  was  distracted  and  failed  to  fix  back  in  place  the  blade 

Cutting machine (with blade guard fitted) 

 

 

 

Hand/arm following treatment 

 
4  Near Miss: Potential Fall When TMS Protection Gate Came Loose 

A  member  has  reported  a  near  miss  potential  fall  and  dropped  object  incident  in  which  a  protection  gate  on  a  Tether 
Management  System  (TMS)  was  almost  lost.    The  incident  occurred  when  crew  were  working  on  the  top  on  of  an  ROV, 
using cut-out holds on the TMS protection gate itself.  The two dogs on top of the protection gate became dislodged from 
their receptacles; whilst the gate was still secured by bolts and ‘R’ clips at the bottom, it fell into the inside of the TMS.  The 
personnel  working  managed  to  hold  onto  one  of  the  main  load  bearing  posts  of  the  TMS.    Full  harness  and  fall  arrestor 
equipment was being used and a permit to work for working at heights had been issued.  There were no injuries or damage 
to equipment.  

Further  investigation  revealed  that  when  downward  force  was  applied  to  the  gates  via  the  cut-outs,  the  gate  became 
dislodged. 

Members are encouraged to make a careful check of this kind of TMS protection gate to ensure they are secured by the top 
pins. If they tend to come out while downward force applied, then the top pins should be changed immediately. The top pin 
which is secured to the gate can be modified such that it won’t dislodge easily. 

 

 

TMS protection gate showing “cut-outs” which are used as foot-holds. 

Bottom of TMS protection gate showing fixing brackets with bolts and ‘R’ clips which remained secured 

 

5  MODU Mooring Line Failure 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following Safety Flash regarding an incident in which a MODU mooring line 
failed.  The line was one of eight mooring lines for the MODU, which was involved in drilling at the time.  The MODU moved 
some 12m and tilted 2-3 degrees but was restored to the correct position using thrusters and ballasting.  

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safety-alert-notice/msf-safety-flash-12.31.pdf 

 

