AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/15 

Safety Flash 

  October 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Focus: incidents occurring lifting operations 

1  Dropped Object Fatalities: Workers Struck by Fallen Loads During Lifting Operations 

The Workplace Safety & Health Council of Singapore (WSH) has published two recent safety alerts regarding dropped object 
fatal incidents where workers have been struck and killed by falling loads during lifting operations. 

Incident 1 

Four  workers  were  on  a  barge,  coiling  the  hoses  (about  30m  long)  of  a 
hydraulic power pack as the hydraulic power pack was being lifted by a crane.  
During the lifting operation, the drip tray at the bottom of the power pack 
suddenly became dislodged and struck the workers as it fell onto the barge.  
All four workers were sent to the hospital.  One of the workers succumbed 
to his injuries and died later the same day.  

 

Click here for further details. 

 

Incident 2 

Click here for further details. 

A crawler crane was lifting bundles of reinforcement bar links (rebar links) 
from a trailer bed to a six-storey high work area. During lifting, one bundle detached from the entire load and hit a worker 
working on the trailer bed.  He was subsequently pronounced dead on scene by paramedics. 

Though only one of these incidents occurred offshore, they form a timely and tragic reminder to crews that no one should 
be directly under the load during lifting operations.  Members may wish to review IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting 
operations. 

IMCA also has a video or DVD, IMCA SEL 030 Rev. 1 – Safe lifting. It can be viewed online or downloaded, and DVD copies of 
this safety video, in ten languages, are available from the secretariat for a small fee. 

2 

Incidents Involving Poor Crane Operations 

A  member  has  reported  a  number  of  recent  incidents  resulting  from  poor  crane  operations  on  the  part  of  the  crews  of 
platforms, barges and other installations operated by third parties, clients or operators.  

A few recent examples are: 

  Vessel bulwark damaged by a crane hook – installation signalman not paying attention; 

  Vessel attempting to abort crane operations and withdraw from installation due to weather deterioration  – installation 
crane driver lowered cargo container despite instructions to cease, resulting in asset damage and spill of methanol cargo 
(this incident is covered in detail in incident 3 below); 

 
  Unexplained delays from an installation crane in releasing mooring ropes when vessel attempting to leave due to weather 

deterioration – deck team exposed to hazard as mooring rope parted; 

  Backload cargo found to be incorrectly slung when landed on deck – near miss from dropped objects (3t cargo unit); 

  Crash rail damaged due to poor crane driving and ignoring deck crew instructions; 

  Crane driver ignored directions, resulting in cargo catching vessel’s dry cargo line and rupturing pipe; 

  During backload with the cargo container above deck, the container door opened – door had not been secured on-board 

  Crane driver ignored direct instructions on where to place a cargo unit, and subsequently lowered the unit onto a rack of 

installation; 

gas cylinders which fell over; 

  During bulk cargo operations close to a fixed platform, the crane driver simply left his cabin with no notification or warning 

to deck crew. The response from the support vessel was to withdraw from the safety zone; 

  Tubular cargo package was loaded from shore – when landed on deck, it was noticed that the cargo slings were twisted 

around each other; 

  Crane driver ignored directions and swung a load into the remote control stand for the vessel’s crane – expensive cost of 

repairs and vessel crane inoperable for several days. 

Example near miss: crew member almost struck by a crane hook 

A  crew  member  was  almost  struck  by  a  swinging  crane  hook.    The  incident  occurred  during  cargo  operations  with  an 
accommodation barge.  The barge’s crane operator was attempting to lower the hook of the crane to pick up some cargo 
from the deck of a support vessel.  Whilst lowering the crane hook, the crane operator lost control of the operation and the 
crane hook began to swing in an uncontrolled manner.  During this uncontrolled movement the crane hook almost struck a 
crew member who was on deck holding a tag line attached to the crane hook, in an effort to try and minimise its movement. 

What went wrong? 

  The crane operator on the accommodation barge was being complacent and rushing the operation; this contributed to 

the uncontrolled manner in which the crane hook was swinging; 

  Although he acted with good intentions, the crew member holding the tag  line put himself in harm’s way by trying to 

control the movement of the crane hook by using the tag line; 

  There  were  failures  to  enforce  both  the  STOP  WORK  POLICY  and  the  CLEAR  DECK  POLICY  during  the 

operation. 

Our member took the following actions:  

hook was stabilized; 

during cargo operations. 

Key Lessons Learnt: 

  On noticing the swinging of the crane hook the Master instructed the deck crew to move to a safe area until the crane 

  The Master contacted the accommodation barge crane operator and instructed him to take his time and be more diligent 

  A CLEAR DECK POLICY should be effectively complied before all lifting operations; 

  All employees are empowered to exercise the STOP WORK POLICY if unsafe conditions arise; 

  Where taglines are to be used, they should allow crew members to stand clear of hazards.  If taglines are not effective, 
crew members should wait until hooks/cargo are grounded or completely heaved away from the work site, to bring them 
under control; 

  Assets and equipment can always be replaced but someone's life cannot; eliminate risk by not putting yourself in harm’s 

way. 

 

 

Members are referred to IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines on lifting operations; 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: crane operator); 

IMCA SF 07/11 – Incident 1 Reliance on crane limits caused crane damage and dropped objects;   

IMCA SF 01/12 – Incident 1 Near miss: Crane hook block dropped to deck.   

 
3  Spillage of Methanol during Cargo Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which the valve on a cargo tank was damaged, causing a leak of approximately 1000 
litres of methanol.  The incident occurred during cargo operations; an FPSO crane operator was lowering an empty methanol 
tank onto the deck of a support vessel.  On lowering, the empty tank struck another full tank of methanol already on deck, 
causing damage to a valve, which caused the spill.  

The Master of the support vessel immediately instructed the FPSO to remove the leaking tank and it was rigged for hoisting 
by the FPSO crane.  Despite this request, the crane operator failed to lift off the leaking container and simply lowered it back 
to the deck.  The crew of the support vessel responded immediately by deploying fire hoses and continuously dousing the deck 
area and leaking container, to disperse the spilt cargo. 

 

Damaged leaking valve of the methanol tank after the incident 

  The crane operator on the FPSO failed to follow instructions given by the deck crew and Master at a critical moment; 

Our member noted the following:  

  Existing procedures were not properly followed: 

  The support vessel’s DGC (Dangerous Goods Certificate) did not allow for methanol cargo to be carried; this was 

not reviewed by vessel staff prior to cargo operations 

  There had not been a full review of the cargo’s MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheet) before operations started; 

  Had the officers on the support vessel correctly reviewed the necessary documents, they would have been able to pro-

actively exercise the STOP WORK POLICY and prevent this incident from occurring. 

Our member’s crew took the following actions: 

 

Immediate request for assistance from Master to FPSO to remove the leaking container; 

  Following aborted cargo lift, Master immediately departed the Safety Zone to safe distance; 

 

Immediate and effective action from deck crew to flush the deck with water, douse the tank and subsequently also flush 
the tank out until all traces of methanol had dispersed. 

Key Lessons Learnt: 

  Dangerous  Goods  Certificates  and  Material  Safety  Data  Sheets  should  be  reviewed  on-board  before  starting  cargo 
operations, to ensure that full compliance is assured at all times.  In case of doubt, Masters should check with appropriate 
company authority ashore;  

In this case despite the identified failings and high potential to become a serious incident, the entire crew responded swiftly 
and  effectively  to  prevent  the  incident  escalating,  highlighting  the  importance  of  good  drills,  exercises  and  emergency 
response awareness.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: cargo, spill, leak, container) 

IMCA SF 11/08 – Incident. 2 Incorrect lifting equipment used [leading to spillage of 45l of ethylene glycol] 

IMCA SF 09/15 – Incident. 1 “Routine” task, non-routine result: batteries stored sideways leak battery acid. 

 

 

 

 
 

