AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/08 

Safety Flash

October 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Laptop Battery Fire and Explosion 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  which  highlights  the  potential  hazards  of  the  lithium-ion  batteries  used  in  laptop 
computers. 

The  incident  occurred  offshore  in  the  accommodation  on  a  member’s  vessel.    The  batteries  of  a  popular  brand  of  laptop 
computer  (Dell  Inspiron  6000)  exploded  while  that  laptop  was  not  in  use  (it  was  being  charged  at  the  time  with  an 
appropriate proprietary battery charger).  The owner of the computer was present at the time of explosion.  The person 
lifted  up  the  computer  and  unplugged  it  immediately  after  flames  and  smoke  came  out.    The  batteries  fell  out  of  the 
computer on to the floor of the cabin, which suffered slight fire damage as a result.  A fire extinguisher was then used on the 
smouldering  batteries.    The  vessel  fire  alarm  was  triggered  by  the  event.    Personnel  involved  in  the  incident  responded 
correctly; due to their actions an escalation was prevented.  No one was injured. 

It  will  be  noted  that  laptop  battery  fires  have  happened  on  occasions  in  the  past  when  Dell  found  it  necessary  to  recall 
certain of its batteries because of the risk of explosion, fire and injury.  Several other producers of laptops and the associated 
batteries – Sony, Toshiba, Apple, HP and Fujitsu – have all encountered similar problems. 

Clearly the outcome of such a battery fire can be severe.  In slightly different circumstances this incident could easily have 
resulted in a serious fire. 

The following preventive actions have been suggested by the company: 

  Never leave charging laptops unattended – either at home or at work; 

 

If you are not sure of your own laptop (battery) check the manufacturer’s website or contact the store where it was 
bought for information. 

2  Pallet Lifter Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which a pallet lifting frame suffered a catastrophic failure.  Various stores were being 
lifted onboard a company vessel during a recent mobilisation.  A crate, containing a crane motor, was being lifted from the 
quayside  on  to  the  vessel  deck;  during  this  operation  the  pallet  lifter  being  used  suffered  a  catastrophic  failure  as  the  lift 
started.  No one was injured. 

The crate was observed to be tagged as weighing 1.6Te, and with a SWL of 2Te the pallet lifter was deemed suitable for the 
proposed  lift.    The  pallet  lifter  was  brought  into  place  and  the  crate  strapped  around  it.    The  lift  was  then  started,  with 
personnel standing clear, and when it was approximately 1m above the quayside the pallet lifter failed and the load dropped 
back to the quayside. 

The pallet lifter had failed at a point on the stem near the forks, where it had buckled through 90°.  The pallet lifter was 
disconnected and left on the quayside and the crate re-rigged and successfully lifted onboard. 

Personnel involved in the lifting operation failed to inform vessel management at the time of the incident but later a report 
was  made,  though  this  was  not  received  by  the  relevant  vessel  personnel  until  the  following  day,  when  an  onboard 
investigation was begun. 

 

 

 

 

 

Investigation proved difficult as most of the evidence had been removed.  The crate had been sent off with the garbage and 
the tag indicating the weight of the load was not kept.  The weight of the crane motor (the load which was dropped) was 
established at 1.4Te, proving that the pallet lifter had failed below its SWL of 2Te. 

Further  investigation  of  the  pallet  lifter  revealed  an  area  of  corrosion  on  the  underside  of  the  forks  where  a  hole  had 
appeared.  In addition the small hole on the otherwise smooth plate end of the cross beam indicated that deterioration was 
taking place inside and working outwards and would not have been evident unless the pallet lifter had been turned on its side.  
The pallet lifter had been inspected four months previously during the six-monthly rigging inspections and the corrosion was 
not identified.  With the extent of the corrosion, some signs would have been evident during this inspection but were not 
spotted or highlighted. 

Onboard personnel who had been using the equipment had also failed to identify that serious corrosion of the pallet lifter 
had occurred. 

The following conclusions were drawn: 

  The corrosion had weakened the structure to such an extent that the pallet lifter could not operate within its working 
limits.  This highlights the fact that reliance on rigging certification is not enough and a regime of continued close and 
thorough monitoring of lifting equipment should be maintained at all times; 

  The actual weight of the crate was not accurately known at any stage and this led to confusion.  It was never verified at 
any stage prior to being lifted.  The manifest detailed the weight at 3.2Te, the ID plate on the motor detailed the weight 
at 2.6Te, the tag showing 1.6Te was never in place as this was confused with an ID number and the actual weight was 
1.4Te. 

 

It is imperative that weights are accurately known prior to carrying out a lift; 

  The investigation was seriously hindered by the incident not being reported when it occurred; 

  The pallet lifter inspection regime failed to identify the extent of the corrosion. 

 

The following actions were recommended: 

  Vessel crews should thoroughly check the condition of any pallet lifting devices they have onboard, with particular focus 
on the corrosion experienced by this unit.  Any devices found to be in an unsatisfactory condition should be removed 
from service immediately and quarantined; 

  Failure of lifting equipment should be reported immediately rather than 24 hours after occurrence, in order to enable an 

effective investigation to be carried out; 

  Personnel involved in lifting operations should ensure that the weight of a load is accurately known prior to starting a lift; 

if there is any doubt or the information is not provided, the lift should be delayed until accurate information is found; 

The pallet lifter inspection records and process were investigated separately as a result of this incident. 

3  Fire Risks of Intermediate Bulk Containers (IBCs) 

Members’  attention  is  drawn  to  a  recent  communication  from  the  UK  Health  &  Safety  Executive  (HSE)  regarding  the  fire 
performance of composite or plastic IBCs.  These are widely used for storage and transportation of combustible liquids. 

There have been a number of serious recent fires in the UK that started or spread as the direct result of the use of plastic 
IBCs for combustible liquids.  Following investigations at the scenes of these fires, a research project was undertaken by the 
HSE  to  provide  data  to  allow  more  reliable  risk  assessments  for  premises  using  IBCs  for  liquid  storage  and  to  provide  a 
stimulus and direction for change in IBC selection and design. 

A short and very informative video of an IBC fire test, which provides a graphic summary of the findings, can be viewed at 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/research/rrhtm/rr564/  

A  comprehensive  report  on  this  matter  was  prepared  by  HSE.    Some  of  the  main  findings  of  the  report  are  summarised 
below.  

Main findings: 

 

 

In an IBC fire, all (combustible) liquid in a stock of unclad IBCs on level ground is likely to be released in a period of the 
order of five to ten minutes; 

IBCs containing liquids with a hydrocarbon character, e.g. fuel oils, edible oils and lubricants, fail very much more quickly 
in fires than those containing water.  The leakage rate on failure is also very much higher; 

  Plastic components of IBCs, i.e. valves, corner protection, plastic pallets etc., are easily ignited, e.g. by a match; 

  Even IBCs containing high flashpoint liquids (up to at least FP 200°C) give severe pool fires involving all of the contents; 

  Metal cladding, of the sort currently used for static protection of some IBCs, can reduce drainage rates.  However, very 

rapid leakage of liquid may still occur following explosions in the ullage; 

  Unless composite IBC design can be improved to reduce the rate of liquid drainage in fires, the potential consequences 

of fires will continue to be very serious. 

Main recommendations: 

complete; 

  Risk  assessments  for  IBC  storage  areas  or  buildings  should be  based on  the  premise  that  liquid  loss  will be  rapid  and 

  The risk assessment should cover the interaction between IBCs and steel drums.  It is good practice to segregate IBCs 

and drums to avoid rapid onset of catastrophic failure of drums and associated fireballs and projectiles; 

  A risk assessment is required for areas or buildings that contain any combustible liquids in IBCs or plastic drums with 

  Manufacturers and suppliers of IBCs should provide clear information on the potential behaviour of IBCs in fire when the 

flashpoints up to at least 200°C; 

containers are supplied; 

  Kerbs and partitions in storage areas may be useful in checking the flow of liquid and spread of fire.  For partitions to be 

effective, the drainage of storage areas should be carefully controlled; 

  Manufacturers should explore the potential for improvements in design; 

  Operators of sites with large stocks of IBCs should consider the pattern of drainage in the event of fire. 

The full report – Fire performance of composite IBCs – can be downloaded from www.hse.gov.uk/research/rrpdf/rr564.pdf 

