AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/01 

August 2001 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of ROV Lift Umbilical Winch Brake 

1.1 

Introduction 

One of our members has informed us of the following incident.  An ROV system was providing subsea intervention 
support  working  from  a  drill  rig  in  depths  up  to  2500msw.    Whilst  conducting  routine  operations,  to  a  depth  of 
2300m,  the  ROV  lift  umbilical  winch  system  was  stopped.  After  approximately  five  minutes,  the  umbilical  winch 
started to ‘creep’ and quickly gather speed.  The operator attempted to arrest the load by operating the winch in an 
upward direction.  This had no effect and by the time the operator had activated the emergency stop the load could 
not  be  stopped  and  the  winch  suffered  an  uncontrolled  payout.    Although  nobody  was  injured,  the  ROV  together 
with 3300m of steel armoured umbilical was lost from the rig and the winch suffered serious damage. 

The initial investigation conducted by the company concerned has shown that the mechanical brake system had failed 
due to excessive wear on the brake plates. 

The particular winch involved was a CORMAC unit manufactured by Norlau.  It appears that only certain types of this 
winch have this characteristic, as the design appears to have changed over the life of the model. 

1.2  Actions to be taken in the event of an Uncontrolled Payout 

In  the  incident  described  above,  by  attempting  to  arrest  the  load  by  operating  the  ‘pay-in’  command,  the  operator 
unwittingly  aided  the  uncontrolled  payout.    This  is  because  when  the  winch  command  lever  is  in  neutral,  the 
mechanical brake is fully engaged.  When a command is given to the winch, the mechanical brake is released as the 
system pressure builds in response to demand.  In this situation, with the winch already starting to gather speed, any 
release of the mechanical brake will aid the uncontrolled payout before the hydraulic drive can counter this release. 

The company concerned has instructed its personnel that if a similar incident is experienced whereby a CORMAC 
winch starts to ‘creep’ under load, no action should be taken and the winch allowed to continue to ‘creep’ until it 
stops.  Should this occur the company has advised that immediate advice be sought in order to ensure safe recovery 
of the load. 

1.3  Brake Test 

1.4  Summary 

The company concerned has identified a torque test with the motor against the brake to determine the amount of 
wear on similar winch systems.  This simply tests the brake against the maximum torque induced by the motor and 
thereby gives an indication of brake condition.  

In the unlikely event that winch drum movement occurs during the test, the company has instructed its personnel that 
all operations using the winch unit under test should be suspended until the extent of wear to the brake system has 
been evaluated. 

The  company  concerned  has  noted  that  actions  described  above  are  designed  to  prevent  re-occurrence  of  this 
serious  incident  by  testing  the  integrity  of  the  mechanical  brake  and  advising  what  to  do  in  the  event  of  a  similar 

 

uncontrolled payout.  However, it notes that these actions are considered to be short term and a long term solution 
is being investigated, possibly as a modification to be agreed in conjunction with the manufacturer. 

2  Failure of Winch Brake on Air Diving Bell System 

One of our members has recently reported a failure of a winch brake on an air diving bell system.  One of their vessel’s was 
undertaking air diving work using a wet diving bell.  When the wet bell, which was deployed at deck level over the side of the 
DSV, was awaiting the diver to enter, it went into free-fall dropping 6m in air and a further 15m in water on to the clump 
weight.  The wet bell was unmanned, nobody was injured although the diver was within seconds of entering it. 

The  subsequent  investigation  determined  that  the  wet  bell  free  fall  was  a  direct  result  of  a  failure  of  the  secondary  band 
brake on the winch.  The fault was clearly visible as the band brake adjustable actuating rod had snapped, rendering the brake 
totally ineffective.  The winch control position is remote from the winch, hence the operator was not aware of the impending 
failure prior to it happening. 

The primary brake on the winch, the hydraulically driven motor system, had supported the wet bell for approximately 5 or 6 
minutes  from  the  time  the  winch  had  been  operated  and  normally  the  secondary  mechanical  brake  would  have  been 
operational during this decay period.  Since the secondary system had failed, when the hydraulic pressure decayed beyond 
the point that the motor would be held, the weight of the bell caused the winch to freewheel allowing the wet bell to free-fall 
from deck level into the sea. 

The  secondary  brake  is  designed  to  be  fail-safe  in  that  it  is  applied  by  spring  pressure  and  released  by  hydraulic  pressure 
when  the  winch  is  operated.    A  hydraulic  ram  pushes  against  the  spring  to  release  the  brake.    The  ram's  linear  action  is 
applied to a lever to increase the braking force and therefore the lever moves through an arc.  To permit the slight rotation 
of the lever, the band brake adjustable actuating rod is connected to the lever via a hinge pin/turnbuckle type arrangement. It 
was found that this hinge pin had become seized due to lack of lubrication and therefore had not been rotating as the brake 
was applied and released.  This resulted in the brake band actuating rod being subjected to a bending moment as well as the 
tensile force for which it was only designed.  This regular bending, small though it may have been, was sufficient to eventually 
cause the 24 mm diameter threaded adjustable rod to snap due to fatigue. 

The  root  cause  of  the  secondary  brake  failure  was  attributed  to  lack  of  maintenance.    Although  some  of  the  winch  band 
brake mechanism was being lubricated on a periodic basis, two grease nipples to lubricate the turnbuckle type hinge pin were 
both difficult to see, rather inaccessible and consequently had not been greased. 

The primary brake, the hydraulic motor, “failed” after a period of 5 or 6 minutes from the time when the winch was last 
operated.  This  failure  was  due  to  the  pressure  decay  in  the  hydraulic  system  as  all  hydraulic  motors  leak  internally.  
The hydraulic  system  should  have  been  configured  to  include  an  accumulator  and/or  valve(s)  to  allow  hydraulic  oil,  at 
pressure, to remain behind the motor and thus only permit the winch to creep as oil pressure decays, rather than freewheel 
out of control. 

The  company  involved  plans  to  systematically  check  all  winches  on  their  vessels  to  ensure  that  this  type  of  failure  is  not 
repeated.  A system modification kit may need to be supplied to provide the correct control of the hydraulic motor in the 
neutral position.  The company involved has also advised its staff to ensure that all moving brake parts of man-riding winches 
are  properly  lubricated,  the  mechanical  braking  system  is  fully  functional  and  no  signs  of  undue  wear  or  uneven  wear  are 
apparent on the band brake; and that these checks should be carried out on a regular basis. 

3 

Incident involving Oxy-acetylene cutting 

One  of  our  members  has  informed  us  of  recent  incident  which  occurred  during  the  assembly  of  oxy-acetylene  cutting 
equipment.  An internal explosion occurred and injured a Dive Tender, fortunately not seriously. 

The review of the incident revealed the following: 

  Oil or grease contamination in the presence of oxygen probably caused the explosion; 

  A dangerous “home made” manifold of unknown origin had been used; 

  Flashback arrestors were not fitted to the system; 

  Regulators had been removed from the cylinders; 

  The oxygen and acetylene cylinders had not been suitably segregated. 

The company involved as proposed the following actions: 

Safety Flash 

 

  All hoses and fittings to be thoroughly checked free of oil/grease contaminants; 

  Only use correct approved fittings and hoses in any pressurised gas system; 

  Flashback arrestors must be fitted in the system; 

  Regulators must not be removed from the cylinders; 

  Oxygen and acetylene gas cylinders must be suitably segregated. 

The company has also advised its staff to inspect all oxygen and acetylene cutting gear and ensure correct fixtures and fittings 
in use. 

