AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/02 

July 2002 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Dynamic Positioning (DP) Blackout Incident 

We  have  received  the  following  information  from  a  member  regarding  a  DP  blackout  incident  on  one  of  its  vessels.  
This safety flash outlines the incident, the learnings from the incident and the member’s recommendations. 

1  Operational Status 

At the time of the incident, the member’s vessel was engaged in routine saturation diving operations and all the systems were 
operating normally.  The weather was good, well within the limits for safe diving operations.  There was a 21 knot wind from 
the south east and a 0.5m swell running.  The dive teams had just completed an on-bottom hand over.  An ROV was also at 
depth with a minor entanglement in some soft line. 

2  The Incident 

At 02:55 hrs power from Board A to the Starboard bell was lost. Board B was selected.  Numerous Starboard bell alarms 
activated.    Some  seconds  later  at  02:56  hrs,  the  vessel  suffered  a  brief  but  complete  loss  of  electrical  power  to  all  ship’s 
systems, an event known in the industry as a ‘black ship’ condition. 

All  vessel  systems  that  were  powered  from  the  vessel’s  power  management  system  (PMS)  were  lost  due  to  the  power 
failure.  Some systems that should have been protected by uninterruptable power supplies (UPSs) also failed. 

Some two minutes later as power and power management was returning, an azimuth thruster was restarted by the DPO.  
A further two minutes elapsed before a tunnel thruster started.  With propulsion now available fore and aft, station keeping 
capability  returned.    At  03:07  hrs,  control  of  the  vessel  was  regained  and  by  03:11  hrs,  all  services  had  been  restored,  all 
generators were on line, all thrusters running and selected to DP.  The divers were successfully returned to the bells and 
recovered to the surface. 

By  a  combination  of  the  efforts  of  the  ship’s  crew  and  the  automatic  functions  of  the  PMS,  power  was  quickly  and 
progressively restored to the vessel’s systems. 

Initial  alarms  on the  Bridge  included loss  of  power management  and loss  of  propulsion  followed quickly by loss of  power.  
The loss of power in turn caused loss of communications, lighting, clocks, positioning systems and steering.  Alarms for ‘dive 
warning’ and ‘abort dive’ were activated in sequence by the DPO. 

During  the  period  between  the  blackout  and  regaining  control  of  the  vessel,  the  vessel  had  moved  some  190m  from  its 
original position at the work site. 

3  Conclusions as to Cause 

1.13.1  Technical 

The  immediate  causes  of  the  incident  have  been  identified  as  technical  in  nature.    Management  system  failures  were  also 
found to have contributed to the incident. 

The technical failures that triggered the events that blacked out the vessel have been identified as: 

 

  Erroneous  signals  were  issued  from  the  PLC  that  manages  the  power  distribution  onboard  the  vessel.  
The erroneous signals were the result of physical degradation of the PLC’s backplane through which all signals 
to and from the unit pass.  This physical degradation definitely included loose contacts, dry joints and possibly 
also cracked and broken tracks in the circuit board itself.  All of these physical substandard conditions can be 
attributed to ageing of the backplane. 

  Terminal resistors on the printed circuit boards within the PLC had been snipped but not fully removed.  It is 
likely  that  the  attempted  isolation  of  these  resistors  was  done  at  the  time  the  vessel  was  commissioned.  
With the  natural  vibration  of  the  ship,  these  resistors  were  intermittently  contacting  the  remainder  of  the 
circuit  boards  of  which  they  were  originally  a  part.    The  effect  of  this  was  to  corrupt  the  data  stored  in  the 
system that tells the system the status of the machinery on the vessel. 

  Wiring within the PLC unit was incorrect resulting in reverse polarity in the series of communications cables.  
The effect of this would have been to stress the electronic components within the system though no evidence 
was  found  that  this  stressing  had  caused  failure  in  any  components.    The  reversed  polarity  could  also  have 
caused corruption of the telegram signals between boards contributing to the corruption of data. 

It was found that US1 detected a self-fault and initiated a change over. US2 took over from US1 as the master PLC. 
US1 shut down as it was receiving inconsistent data and interpreted this as a fault within itself.  This occurred as a 
result of the corrupted signals issued from the faulty backplane.  US2 took over as it was designed to do. 

Once US2 took over from US1, the combination of erroneous signals and corrupt data caused the software to open 
the  Port  230V  secondary  breaker  and  then  to  take both  generators  off  the  6kV  board  and  open  the  6kV  bus  tie 
more or less simultaneously.  This action left the vessel without power resulting in the blackout. 

1.23.2  Management Systems 

3.2.1  Prior History 

The  investigation  found  that  there  was  a  significant  history  of  unexplained  starting  and  stopping  of  machinery 
onboard the vessel going back over many years though the significance of this history was not recognised either by 
offshore or onshore management. 

In hindsight, it  is  clear that the previous  events were  significant  in  that they  were indicating  a  fault  condition that 
could, and ultimately did result in unsafe conditions.  However, prior to the blackout and subsequent investigation, 
personnel operating the vessel believed that the FMEAs of the vessel’s systems and the classification of the vessel 
confirmed that no single point failure could introduce unsafe conditions. 

1.1.23.2.2 

FMEA, Trials & Audits 

The  DP  FMEA  for  the  vessel  has  been  reviewed  as  part  of  the  investigation  and  was  found  to  be  inadequate.  
This had not been identified either internally or in the process of the many trials programmes and audits which the 
vessel has undergone since the FMEA was written in 1991. 

1.1.33.2.3 

Planned Maintenance 

1.1.43.2.4 

Training and Procedures 

The investigation found that the UPSs onboard the vessel are not included in the planned maintenance system.  

Until the incident, it had been universally considered that a blackout condition was not possible onboard the vessel 
due  to  the  configuration  of  the  PMS.    Consequently,  the  crew  had  not  trained  to  deal  with  such  an  event,  no 
procedures were in place and no back-up power available.  Given the very sudden and comprehensive nature of the 
blackout,  the  crew  responded  in  a  professional  manner  to  the  event,  normalising  the  situation  without  injury  or 
significant damage. 

4  Recommendations 

As  a  result  of  the  incident  and  the  findings  of  the  investigation,  the  company  involved  has  identified  a  number  of 
recommendations which are set out below: 

i) 

The  existing  PMS,  which  was  installed  some  years  ago  and  is  becoming  obsolete  should  be  replaced  with  a  more 
modern system.  The learning from this incident should be incorporated in the specification for the new system. 

Safety Flash 

 

ii) 

Planned maintenance routines should be revised to include the UPSs onboard.  Pre-operational checks should include 
testing of relevant UPSs.  The UPSs should be reconfigured so that power is supplied to the consumer through the UPS 
at all times.  Primary and secondary monitoring should also be installed on all UPSs. 

iii)  The scope of Dynamic Positioning FMEAs for other vessels in the fleet should be reviewed to ensure that all features 

affecting the redundancy capabilities of each vessel, including power management, are included in the analysis. 

iv)  The scope of Diving System FMEAs for other vessels in the fleet should be reviewed to ensure that all features affecting 

the redundancy capabilities of the diving system, including power management are included in the analysis. 

v) 

The impact of ageing on critical components on other vessels in the fleet should be considered as part of FMEA (or 
FMECA) and maintenance/upgrade system requirements adjusted accordingly.  The age profile of existing safety critical 
electronic systems should be mapped. 

vi)  The adequacy of the annual DP trials protocol should be reviewed to ensure that they verify the effectiveness of the 
redundancy provisions associated with power management and its criticality in respect of station keeping in accordance 
with revised FMEAs. 

vii)  A  review  should  be  undertaken  to  determine  if  the  timing  mechanisms  of  the  various  systems  onboard  can  be 

synchronised. If this is practical, it should be implemented. 

viii)  Diving  emergency  and  contingency  procedures  to  be  reviewed  as  a  result  of  this  incident  and  familiarisation  of 

personnel with emergency power options emphasised. 

ix)  The PMS/DP failure/maintenance records on the other vessels in the fleet should be reviewed to identify if any have 

similar history that could now indicate common failure modes. 

x) 

Existing records of non-conformity (NCRs) should be reviewed to identify any trends that may suggest common fault 
modes in safety critical equipment.  Consideration should be given to establishing a technical review panel to evaluate 
equipment related non-conformity reports. 

xi)  Black box recording of fault detection and logging should be established for all key safety parameters.  This would assist 

in identifying intermittent faults prior to incidents and the analysis of causal factors after incidents. 

xii)  Policy in respect of supervision of work on safety critical systems should be reviewed with a view to improving control 
and addressing the potential for poor workmanship.  This should include third party activities and should apply to new 
systems and change or modification of existing systems. 

