Safety Flash 

 August 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 20/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

In the following four unconnected incidents, we move through different areas of concern for IMCA members.  We 
begin with an incident of electrical power loss in dive control, before looking at  a second diving incident where 
there was a stored energy release following failure of a valve on a diving gas bottle.  The third incident also covers 
a  potentially  serious  stored  energy  release,  where  incorrect  valves  were  fitted  to  a  high-pressure  steam  piping 
system.  The fourth incident covers a small fire discovered in oxy-acetylene hoses.  No personnel were injured in 
any of these incidents.  IMCA welcomes the reporting of near miss incidents, as these can often provide the best 
lessons for the industry in terms of improving overall safety.  

1  Power Loss Within Dive Control 

What happened? 

During diving operations, there was a power loss scenario within dive control whereby both circuit breakers after 
the uninterruptible power supply (UPS) tripped, causing a loss of power to the electronic components of the dive 
system.  Power was re-established using the UPS bypass switch.  The dive was aborted to carry out investigation.  
No-one was harmed. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

During setup of the dive system the UPS was set to work on approx. 220VAC input (the input from a vessel generator 
power supply typically fluctuates).  The UPS was also set up on the assumption that the power from the vessel 
would not drop below 85% of the expected supply voltage (a drop to 187VAC). 

Investigation confirmed that this is in fact what happened – the supply voltage did indeed drop below the minimum 
threshold of 187VAC.  When this happened, an automatic and internal bypass in the UPS kicked in to keep power 
supplied to the outlet side.  Therefore, the low voltage was transferred through the internal UPS bypass and into 
the circuit breakers that protected all the electronic equipment in dive control. 

When  attached  to  a  fixed  output  load  (such  as  electronic  equipment),  a  voltage  drop  will  necessarily  cause  an 
increase in current flow.  The current increased to the point where the circuit breakers tripped to further protect 
the electronic equipment.  This disconnection of the power to the electronics shut them down without the UPS 
taking over or giving any sort of alarm condition. 

This voltage drop may have been gradual and therefore was not noticed.  It wouldn’t have affected any other circuit 
breakers  as  there  wouldn’t  have  been  any  power  spike.    However,  since  the  UPS  corrects  to  85%  of  the  input 
voltage,  once  that  limit  was  reached  it  automatically  transferred  to  the  bypass,  thereby  immediately  causing  a 
power spike  on the output  side  as the voltage changed from 220VAC (UPS corrected) output  to <187VAC (UPS 
bypassed output). 

 

 

 
Further investigation revealed that the low voltage was a result of a large current draw, in turn as a result of other 
equipment on the same power bus being used at the same time.  In this case, it was discovered that the ROV was 
being recovered from the water at the time of the power loss.  On this vessel, the dive system power is taken from 
the same power bus as that which is used for the ROV.   

What actions were taken?  What were the lessons learned? 

 

Immediate Action: Verify that the ROV BUS tie breaker on the vessel 440VAC power distribution panel was in 
the  open  position.    This  circuit  breaker  needs  to  remain  in  the  open  positon  at  all  times  during  diving  and 
chamber operations; 

  Set the UPS on all similar vessels to prohibit the use of the internal bypass again.  This means that if at any point 
a low voltage scenario occurs again, the UPS will switch onto the battery backup, give an audible alarm and the 
internal bypass will never be used; 

  The dive supervisors should be made aware that this alarm may occur at any time a high draw/low voltage 

situation is experienced again and all they need to do is to call the dive techs to confirm the UPS status; 

  A daily “health” check of the UPS system has been added to the planned maintenance system for all company 

UPS systems; 

  Due to the nature of the issue, the manufacturer was contacted during the investigation to seek advice on the 
UPS.  The manufacturer had not reported similar occurrences, but a report will be sent to them for their records. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Dynamic positioning (DP) vessel blackout. 

2  High Potential Near Miss: Failure of Valve on Gas Bottle 

What happened? 

The Royal New Zealand Navy has reported an explosion during the refilling 
of gas bottles used for naval diving operations.  A crewman was refilling 
bottles when he heard a loud explosion and looked up to see the charging 
whip thrashing around violently.  Upon establishing that it was safe to do 
so, the crewman closed all gas supply and receiver valves.  After confirming 
that  the  situation  had  been  stabilised,  he  reported  the  situation  to  his 
supervisor. 

Though the filling components had been correctly connected, one of the bottle valves has failed and was violently 
expelled from the high pressure (HP) cylinder.  As a result of the failure, the charging whip and valve remnant had 
forcefully impacted a nearby wall.  Had these parts hit the crewman the consequences could have been very much 
more serious.  

Normal Flask Filling 

Post-incident outcome 

 

 

 

 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The valve failure was mechanical in nature; a metallurgical failure of the integrity of the valve assembly, rather 
than being due to the process of filling the flask.  Analysis determined that a combination of corrosion induced 
cracking and fatigue in the dipper tube thread roots lay at the heart of the failure; 

  The exact cause of the corrosion could not be identified; however, the presence of dezincification and small 
particles of Verdigris in the cracks suggested that insufficient rinsing, after the 24-monthly application of mildly 
acidic BIOX cleaning compound, was the most probable cause; 

  The level of Verdigris and the lack of oxygen caps and written emergency procedures show a need for further 

development of management systems; 

  There was a post incident procedural failure, in that the person involved was not checked by a medic.  Despite 

this he does not appear to have suffered any lasting detrimental effects as a result of the incident. 

The following points, not strictly causal factors, were also identified by the investigation:  

  While there can be statutory obligations relating to the testing and inspecting of cylinders, no such rules apply 

to the valves fitted to them; 

  The lack of an appropriately defined operational life for valves of this nature (manufactured of non-magnetic 
brass  vs.  more  conventional/durable  materials)  potentially  missed  an  opportunity  for  them  to  have  been 
‘retired’ prior the failure; 

  Oversights in regulatory compliance around correctly permanently marking or labelling valves; 

 

Lack of regulatory compliance in relation to ensuring that personnel involved in filling high pressure cylinders 
should hold appropriate (locally required) certification; 

  Potential ‘oxygen cleanliness’ issues in relation to adherence to the fitting of valve caps when cylinders are not 

in use and limited the permissible levels of Verdigris build up on valve threads. 

What actions were taken?  What were the lessons learned? 

  All similar valves of a similar age have been removed from service and replaced with new; 

  Appropriate record-keeping measures were put in place for controlling the age of valves in use;   

  A new method of securing filling arrester whips to cylinder necks was devised to prevent the potential thrashing 

  A  review  was  made  of  procedures  for  valve  oxygen  cleanliness  to  ensure  they  meet  the  minimum 

around of loose whips under pressure; 

internationally recommended standards; 

 
  Recommendation was made that local regulations associated with the acquisition, introduction into service, 
on-going  maintenance,  marking  and  establishing  a  defined  maximum  operational  life  of  valves  used  in 
association with HP cylinders, should be amended to reflect the lessons identified in this incident; 

  Consider further development of training course for persons involved in filling HP cylinders.  

Failure of gas bottle valves is unfortunately not uncommon.  Members 
may  wish  to  look  through  IMCA  safety  flashes  themselves  on  our 
website: 

In this box: 

 

Type in the words you wish to search for.  For example, valve failure.  

Herewith a selection of the results: 

  Bailout Cylinder And Pillar Valve Compatibility Failure; 

  Pillar Valve Failure; 

 

Injuries Due To Failure Of Diver’s Emergency Gas Cylinder. 

3 

Incorrect Pressure Gauge on High Pressure Supply Line 

What happened? 

The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP) 
has published Safety Alert 284 relating to a small steam leak 
from a pressure gauge on the high pressure steam supply to 
a  turbine.    An  incorrect  gauge  was  installed.    The  pressure 
gauge was rated to one Bar(g) and the safety seal failed when 
it was exposed to 55 Bar(g) steam during re-commissioning.  
The pressure gauge in question was brand new and had been 
fitted during the recent maintenance period. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

From the IOGP alert: 

  The pressure gauge was inspected and found to be a “0-
100%”  gauge,  where  a  “0-100  Bar”  pressure  gauge 
should have been installed; 

  The 0-100% gauge had been ordered in error for a prior 
boiler  shutdown  and  had  been  subsequently  stored  in 
the utilities equipment room, rather than returned to the 
warehouse for disposal; 

  Technicians had established a culture of storing some small items in equipment rooms to allow easy access for 

small maintenance tasks; 

  On the day of installation, the 0-100% gauge was mistaken for a 0-100 Bar pressure gauge (due to the near 
identical appearance) and was taken from the utilities equipment room and installed on the steam turbine high 
pressure steam supply line. 

 

 

 

 
Corrective Actions and Recommendations: 

IOGP recommendations were: 

  Check all stores stock to ensure that all pressure gauges are stored in the correct place and in the correct boxes; 

  Ensure that all unused equipment is returned to the place of issue at the end of each day.  This ensures that 

only the correct equipment for a specific work order can be withdrawn; 

  Ensure that all pressure gauges are function checked and fit for purpose before installation; 

  Review stores stock items and material numbers to establish those that are no longer used or required.  Block 

all numbers that are not required so as to prevent re-ordering by accident; 

  For legacy assets, review and rationalize all local pressure gauges across each facility with a view to removing 

those that are no longer used or required. 

See the full alert on the IOGP website.  Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Failure of hydraulic fitting at pressure; 

 

Incorrect pressure-rated manifold fitted to diver’s bail-out. 

4  Oxygen and Acetylene Hose Caught Fire  

What happened? 

A small fire was discovered in oxygen/acetylene hoses.  Workers heard an “air blowing sound” and left their work 
location to investigate.  Smoke and flames were noticed and a closer look revealed oxygen and acetylene hoses on 
fire.  The fire alarm was raised; one person immediately grabbed and kinked the hoses to close the supply of gas. 
This ceased the fire before another person came with an extinguisher, which at that point was no longer needed. 
The  valves  on  the  gas  cylinders  (located  some  distance  away)  were  closed,  and  the  hoses  depressurized  and 
disconnected.  There were no injuries, just some slight material damage. 

At the time of the incident:  

  No personnel were working in the area; 

  No hot work activities were ongoing in the area;  

  Gas  hoses  were  found  contaminated  with  a  few  hydraulic  oil 

stains; 

  Gas hoses were in a narrow-edged area. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Oxygen is very reactive.  Pure oxygen, at high pressure – such as from a cylinder – can react violently with common 
materials,  such  as  oil  and  grease,  resulting  in  a  spontaneous  fire.    Also,  other  materials  may  catch  fire 
spontaneously.  A leaking valve or hose in a poorly ventilated room or confined space also can quickly increase the 
oxygen concentration to a dangerous level.  The air we breathe contains about 21% oxygen.  Even a small increase 
in the oxygen level (called oxygen enrichment) in the air – to just 24% – can create a dangerous situation.  To avoid 
the risk of fires and explosions when oxygen comes into contact with oil and grease, it is important that equipment 
used for welding and cutting is not allowed to become contaminated with these materials. 

What lessons were learnt? 

Our member notes that in this particular case the following workplace conditions could have contributed to the 
incident: 

  Sharp edges and a surface that could have damaged the hose; 

  Oil residues that could have contaminated the hose; 

 

 
  Narrow, almost confined space conditions, with potential lack of ventilation that could have contributed to the 

build-up of the oxygen level. 

Actions – what should you do if you suspect oxygen enrichment from an oxygen leak? 

1. 

2.  

3. 

4.  

 turn off the oxygen supply; 

extinguish cigarettes and open flames; 

 make sure the room is well ventilated; 

identify and repair the source of the leak. 

Useful information regarding these hazards can be found in the leaflet Oxygen Use in the Workplace, published by 
the UK Health and Safety Executive (UK HSE). 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Near-Miss: Potential Use Of Petroleum-Based Grease In An Oxygen-Rich Environment; 

  Hose Fire Caused By Flashback In Oxygen And Acetylene Hoses; 

  Worker Severely Burnt Following Oxygen Explosion. 

 

