AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/06 

Safety Flash 

October 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Wire Break in Wind Sensor Caused DP Drive-Off 

A member has reported an incident in which one of its vessels suffered a DP drive-off during valve monitoring operations in 
open water.  The wind was light – 5-10 knots – and there was good visibility.  The vessel was on DP, with 2 x DGPS, 2 x taut 
wires and two wind sensors selected in the system.  An ROV was in the water and the diving bell was on the surface with 
diving operations completed.  

The  DP  operators  noticed  an  increase  in  the  thruster  pitch  followed  by  an  ‘off  position’  warning,  whereupon  both  DGPS 
were deselected.  The operators then noticed that one wind sensor was reading 60 knots – clearly an error – while the wind 
speed registered on the DP console was 35 knots as an average of the two sensor speeds. 

The errant wind sensor was deselected immediately and the vessel position then stabilised at 17m from the original set-point.  

The following points were noted on completion of the investigation:  

  The cabling for the failed wind sensor had been routed through a junction box which had suffered water ingress due to a 

failed seal, effectively leading to a wire break; 

  Tests showed that the errant wind sensor failed to zero or failed to maximum (60 knots) dependent upon where the 

wire was broken.  The other wind sensors were wired differently and failed to zero at all times; 

  One wind sensor had been deselected automatically as a function of the DP software, as it was registering less than 5 

knots.  Had three sensors been in the system, the DP would have rejected the errant signal; 

  There was no alarm for the operators and the location of the manual readouts was poor in relation to line of sight for 

the DP operators; 

  This particular failure mode of the sensors was not covered by the failure modes, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA). 

The company concerned took the following actions: 

  Changes to wiring of errant sensor (a filter) to prevent recurrence of ‘failure to maximum’; 

  DP software upgrade to include a discrepancy alarm; 

  Wire break tests conducted throughout the company’s fleet to see if the problem exists elsewhere. 

The potential for a serious accident has led to this DP incident being distributed as a safety flash. 

