AB 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/12 

Safety Flash 

 October 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Diver Injured During Subsea Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver was struck and injured by a two tonne weight as it was being deployed 
from  the  vessel  crane  during  subsea  installation  work.    The  incident  occurred  when  two  divers  were  assisting  in  the 
installation of an external bell mouth on to its protruding J-tube mounting points at an offshore wind turbine base pile in 23 
metres of water.  Shortly after the start of the dive it was decided to send down a two tonne dead man anchor (DMA) and a 
lever  hoist.    These  were  required  to  pull  the  bell  mouth  into  the  correct  alignment  for  fitting.    Before  the  DMA  was 
deployed, the diving supervisor instructed both divers to move in a specific direction to a safe location away from the bell 
mouth.    The  divers  were  also  told  to  look  upwards  to  observe  the  DMA  deployment.    Diver  1  initially  followed  these 
instructions but he later moved back into the danger zone without direction from the supervisor.  Diver 1 was subsequently 
struck by the DMA as it was lowered by the vessel crane from the surface.  Diver 1may also have been pinned to the seabed 
by the weight of the anchor for a few seconds until it was lifted off him by the crane.  The injured diver was treated on-board 
the vessel and subsequently evacuated to hospital by helicopter.  The diver was released from the hospital later the same day 
and sent home on temporary sick leave.  

The incident demonstrates that divers keen to complete their work may be tempted to move into danger zones during the 
course of subsea lifting operations.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bell Mouth and Intended Underwater Arrangement 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

Immediate causes  

  Over-rapid lowering of the load; 

 

Lack of knowledge of the whereabouts and depth of the subsea load during its deployment through the water column; 

  The subsea load was lowered all the way to the seabed with no appropriate mid-water stop point; 

  The diver was directly below the load as it was being lowered; 

 

Poor communication and co-operation between the diving supervisor and the divers; 

  Owing to misunderstanding, diver 1 failed to follow the instructions of the diving supervisor; 

  The diving supervisor failed to realise or notice that the diver had moved back into the danger zone. 

 
Root causes  

 

Inadequate hazard identification and risk assessment; 

  No common toolbox talk held before the start of the operation; 

  No lift plan or safe working procedure for deploying the load whilst divers were in the water; 

  Reliance  on  the  diver  following  instructions;  failure  to  take  sufficient  account  of  human  factors  leading  to  errors 

  Complacency – the operation was perceived as being a simple, familiar and repetitive task, and personnel may have been 

(mistakes and violations); 

operating within a “comfort zone”. 

operations; 

diving operations; 

Our member drew the following lessons from the incident: 

  All  personnel  (including  divers)  should  attend  toolbox  talks  to  review  the  plan  before  the  start  of  subsea  lifting 

  Appropriate risk assessment should take place to cover the particular challenges of vessel lifting operations in support of 

 

 

 

 

 

Lift plans prepared by competent persons should be in place before the start of subsea lifting operations; 

Ensure effective communications between all members of the lifting team; 

Personnel (including divers) should never work underneath loads; 

  Divers should retreat to confirmed safe locations (e.g. the dive basket or bell clump weight) during the lowering or lifting 
of loads through the water column and remain there until they are alerted that the chosen stop point has been reached; 

  Use of travel length indicators to stop loads at an agreed distance above seabed; 

  Use of specific lift deployment speeds in lift plans/procedures; 

Loads should be lowered in a controlled manner at specific and agreed speeds, rather than in free fall; 

Equipment  and  procedures  should  be  in  place  to  enable  the  crane  driver  and  diving  supervisor  to  know  the  depth  of 
loads as they are lowered through the water column; 

  Use of suitable stop points in the water column so that loads are not deployed straight to the seabed (or lifted straight 

to the surface), allowing time for divers to retreat to a safe location. 

Members may wish to refer to the following IMCA documents: 

IMCA SEL 019 Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA M 205 Guidance on operational communications (also available as IMCA D 046) 

IMCA D 014 IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving 

2  Tombarra Fall Wire Fatality: Updated Reports 

The UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) has published two updated reports on the investigation of the fatality 
of a rescue boat crewman on board Tombarra in February 2011. 

The first is Report 19A/2012 Part A - The failure of the fall wire. 

The following key issues are highlighted in this report:  

♦  A rescue boat fell 29 metres killing one of the boat's four crew; 

♦  The boat's fall wire parted following the failure of a proximity switch which enabled the davit's winch to overload the 

wire; 

♦  A  holistic  view  of  the  design,  approval  and  compatibility  of  davit  and  winch  systems  is  essential  to  prevent  individual 

components of the system being overstressed to the point of failure; 

♦ 

It is essential that ships’ crews always test safety devices before use and do not rely on them for their safety. 

The second is Report No 19B/2012 Part B - The weight of the rescue boat. 

The following key issues are highlighted in this report:  

 
♦  The rescue boat was found to be 50% overweight.  During the investigation, other rescue boats were found to be up to 

110% overweight; 

♦  The  additional  weight  was  due  to  water  ingress  through  the  hull  and  subsequent  entrapment  in  the  boat's  internal 
stiffeners and foam-filled compartments buoyancy spaces, and could only be removed by drilling holes or removing the 
deck; 

♦  The crew were unaware that the boat was significantly heavier than designed; 

♦  The  number  of  other  rescue  boats,  made  by  differing  manufacturers  which  have  also  been  found  to  be  overweight, 
indicates  that  the  problem  of  water  entrapment  within  buoyancy  spaces  is  widespread  and  potentially  extends  to 
lifeboats and leisure craft; 

♦  The investigation identified the need to weigh the boats on a regular basis. 

The two reports are available from: 

Report 19A/2012 Part A - The failure of the fall wire www.maib.gov.uk/cms_resources/TombarraPartA_Report.pdf 

Report No 19B/2012 Part B - The weight of the rescue boat www.maib.gov.uk/cms_resources/TombarraPartB.pdf 

The UK MAIB’s earlier preliminary findings and updated findings were published in IMCA Safety Flash 05/11 and IMCA Safety 
Flash 09/11. 

3  Lifejacket Recall - Mullion Compact 150N ISO 12402 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following Safety Flash regarding a potential safety concern with the Mullion 
COMPACT150N ISO 12402 LIFEJACKET, once it is inflated.  Mullion has recalled all COMPACTLIFEJACKETS which have 
been sold since 1 December 2011 if they have a YELLOW valve in the oral inflation tube. See the diagrams in the link below 
for more details.  

The Safety Flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.38.pdf 

4  Damage to Davit-mounted Small Boats 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published two recent Safety Flashes regarding damage to davit-mounted daughter craft.  

In the first instance, the damage was caused by the hull of the daughter craft compressing the hollow ‘D’ Rubber pads on the 
cradle  and  the  hull  coming  into  direct  contact  with  the  steel  cradle.    The  report  can  be  downloaded  from 
www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.36.pdf. 

In  the  second,  a  number  of  vessels  have  reported  damage  to  fall  wires.    The  report  can  be  downloaded  from 
www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.37.pdf.  

5  Hand Injury During O2 Handling and Equipment Maintenance 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  on  a  dive  support  vessel  in  which  there  was  an  explosion  and  a  person  suffered  2nd 
degree burns to his hands.  The incident occurred during the changing of an O2 gas quad on a diving support vessel (DSV).  
The injured person, who was competent and qualified for this work, was wearing full personal protective equipment (PPE) 
for  the  task  including  ear  protection.    He  successfully  disconnected  and  vented  the  used  quad  which  was  at  a  pressure  of 
around 20bar, closed all relevant valves and removed the O2 regulator.  The regulator was subsequently removed from the 
empty quad and transferred directly onto a fully charged quad at a pressure of 200bar.  The regulator was tightened and the 
whip lines fitted as per requirements.  The injured person then proceeded to open all 16 of the individual pillar valves on the 
individual bottles; then checked to ensure the regulator was wound back, prior to cracking the king valve to allow O2 to flow 
into the regulator. 

At this point an explosion occurred and the injured person was exposed to the blast resulting in serious burns to both hands.  
Because the injured person was shocked due to the sudden blast, he stepped away from the quad.  All the pillar valves for all 
the  bottles  were  open;  this  allowed  the  gas  to  start  venting  directly  from  the  failed  regulator  resulting  in  a  potentially 
catastrophic  situation.    The  injured  person  tried  to  close  the  king  valve,  but  it  was  later  found  that  the  valve  seat  was 
damaged during the blast, and thus the O2 could not be isolated by the king valve.  More personnel arrived and helped to 
close all of the pillar valves bringing the situation under control. 

 
It  was  later  established  that  the  injured  person  sustained  2nd  degree  burns  to  both  hands  due  to  the  high  temperatures 
created by the blast, despite wearing appropriate hand protection (gloves) on both hands. 

Our member’s investigation and conclusion noted the following: 

♦  Due  to  the  nature  of  the  incident  and  the  failure  of  the  regulator,  the  specific  cause  of  the  explosion  could  not  be 

determined; 

♦  The practice of opening all 16 pillar valves meant that once the regulator failure had occurred, the entire contents of the 

quad was able to vent in an uncontrolled manner; 

♦  The regulator was later identified as being around 12 years old; this was in excess of the recommended working age for 

this type of equipment; 

♦  There  was  evidence  of  white  PTFE  thread  tape  having  been  used  on  the  regulator  threads.    This  could  have  been  a 

contributory factor and potential fuel for the explosion/fire; 

♦  The  PTFE  Thread  Tape,  used  for  sealing  the  threads  in  this  operation,  was  not  appropriate  or  suitable  for  this  O2 

application; 

♦  The pipe work directly after the regulator was a 90 degree elbow joint which is not recommended for gas systems; 

♦  The  regulator  connection  nut  flats  were  found  to  be  damaged  (rounded)  due  to  the  previous  use  of 

♦  The regulator had not been cleaned and inspected to appropriate levels for O2 operations, prior to connection to a fully 

incorrect/inappropriate tools; 

charged quad; 

♦  The maintenance records for the regulator were not adequately documented; 

♦  Pressure gauges installed within an O2 enriched pressurised system should not be used in these cases: 

–  The gauge is not O2 compatible; 
–  The gauge has been damaged (including nuts or threads); 
–  There is suspicion of tampering; 
–  The gauges are over 5 years old and have not been serviced; 
–  The gauge operating range is out with the maximum pressure rating of the regulator or cylinder. 

Our member took the following actions: 

♦  Personnel  working  with  O2  to  be  required  to  review  the  appropriate  company  procedures  and  also  manufacturers’ 

safety, installation and operations precautions; 

♦  Specialised  Oxygen  Green  PTFE  Thread  Tape  (Thread  Seal  Tape  ½”  x  260  T-27730A  (rated  @10,000  psi)  should  be 

used for O2 operations; 

♦  Thread tape must be kept clear of the end of the fitting by 1.5-2 threads; 

♦  A six monthly test and inspection routine for loose O2 regulators has been added to the planned maintenance system; 

♦  All regulators to be replaced after 5 years of service and a clear maintenance log maintained; 

♦  Maintenance of the regulators should be conducted by a suitably trained and qualified person; 

♦  Revision of PPE for this work to ensure operators are fully protected against relevant hazards of the task; 

♦  Dedicated  set  of  “Clean  and  Correct”  sized  spanners  should  be  purchased  and  kept  specifically  for  use  on  fittings. 

Adjustable spanners should not be used; 

♦  A designated clean environment should be established for maintenance of the regulators; 

♦  Pre-use regulator checklist should be developed following manufacturers’ guidance notice; 

♦  All O2 pipe work to be reviewed and 90 degree joints removed wherever possible, in particular on the inlet or outlet 

from a regulator to prevent friction and potential ignition points; 

♦  Only  O2  compatible  gauges  shall  be  purchased  as  spares  and,  wherever  possible,  the  same  gauge  type/model  shall  be 

♦  Pressure gauges should be fitted directly to regulators without restrictive or bend connections. 

ordered;  

 

