AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/16 

Safety Flash 

 May 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  Preliminary Report into Helicopter Crash near Bergen 

The Air Accident Investigation Board of Norway (AIBN) has published a preliminary report on the accident at Turøy, 
near Bergen, Norway on 29 April 2016.  

An  Airbus  H225  helicopter  was  en  route  from  an  offshore  platform  in  the  Norwegian  sector  to  Bergen  Airport 
Flesland.  The helicopter was cruising at 600m when the Main Rotor Head (MRH) and mast suddenly detached.  The 
helicopter impacted on a small island and caught fire.  The main wreckage thereafter ended in the sea where it 
came to rest at a depth of 1-9 meters.  11 passengers and two crew perished in the accident.   

The AIBN notes: 

“The Preliminary report is published to disseminate information obtained during the earliest stages of the 

investigation.  The intention is to give a brief update on the progress and findings two weeks into the 
investigation.  The report is factual and contains neither conclusions nor safety recommendations”. 

The helicopter  accident  preliminary report  can be downloaded  here.   The  Norwegian Air Accident Investigation 
Board website can be found accessed: http://www.aibn.no/home. 

