Safety Flash 

December 2016 

IMCA Safety Flash 33/16 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

There is no common theme to this safety flash.  Members are to be thanked for continuing to share high quality 
incidents with IMCA.  We have a lot of incidents waiting to be published, and this “mixed” safety flash deals with 
some of the backlog.  In this flash we have: 

  Failure to report a subsea hydraulic leak – procedures were not followed; 

  A vessel that made contact with the quay, damaging both – poor communications; 

  A dropped object from a crane – a continuing theme and an important reminder on DROPS; 

  A heavy pipe that fell from a stand and killed two workers in a yard – a failure of hazard and risk awareness; 

  An ROV supervisor gets a serious electric shock – again, a failure of hazard and risk awareness; 

  Unsafe boarding of vessels – procedures not followed; failing to understand hazard and risk; 

  A crewman that fell down stairs and broke his arm. 

1 

Failure to Report Hydraulic Leak Subsea 

A member has reported an incident in which crew failed to appropriately report a hydraulic leak subsea.  The intent 
of this report is to highlight key learnings from that failure and 
to  understand  the  reasons  why  the  incident  had  not  been 
reported at the time of occurrence. 

The incident occurred during subsea operations which involved 
divers  monitoring  a  manifold  valve.    A  hydraulic  release 
occurred when a valve was operated by the client FPSO.  This 
leak was not detailed on the Dive Log or as an anomaly within 
the Management of Change (MoC) step of the operation.  It was 
not  reported  to  the  Offshore  Management  Team  nor  to  the 
client representative on board at the time.  The client became 
aware of the leak some four months later following a review of 
as-built video footage, and onshore project management were 
notified  of  the  incident.    In  the  regulatory  framework  within 
which the vessel was operating, it is a requirement that any such 
releases to sea are reported by the client within 6 hours of such an event occurring. 

No personnel were harmed or equipment damage sustained; however, an unknown volume of fluid was discharged 
to the environment which was not reported at the time of the incident. 

 

 

 
Our member noted the following: 

The following lessons were learnt: 

defined. 

offshore; 

  The  requirement  to  report  all  subsea  leaks  was  not  followed.    Personnel  were  not  familiar  with  company 

procedures in place to ensure compliance with local regulations; 

  Project  process  to  manage  implementation  of  client  site  instructions  for  additional  works  were  not  clearly 

  Ensure that pollution reporting process requirements are understood by all key personnel both onshore and 

  Dive Plans should clearly reflect requirement to notify both client, master and project engineer of any discharge 

observed from subsea infrastructure. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: pollution): 

 

IMCA SF 16/14 – Incident 5 – Ruptured hydraulic hose. 

2  Vessel Made Contact with Quay 

A member has reported an incident in which a vessel landed heavily on the quay, causing damage.  The incident 
occurred during the hours of darkness, during shifting of the vessel’s position at the berth.  The shifting plan was 
discussed between the Master and the pilot and information was exchanged.  The vessel’s position was agreed to 
be adjusted to meet the terminal’s requirements for cargo offloading.  Two tugs arrived and the shifting operation 
began.  The main engine and bow thruster were on standby and used as required. 

The operation proceeded as planned and the  vessel 
came gently to a stop, parallel to berth about 2 meters 
out.  At this time, an unloading boom needed to be 
deployed.    It  was  found  that  this  could  not  be 
deployed  whilst  the  vessel  was  in  this  position,  as 
there was fixed equipment on the berth in the way.  
After  further  adjustment  of  vessel  position,  the 
unloading boom was swung out. 

The Master requested that the Pilot take extra care as 
the  vessel  was  brought  alongside.    However,  as  the 
vessel was being pushed towards the berth both tugs failed to push in harmony.  The after tug pushed more and 
instead of landing parallel to the berth, the vessel’s port quarter landed heavily on the quay near Bollard 7.  The 
vessel’s port side shell plating was damaged near a fuel oil tank, and there was damage to the concrete of the quay 
itself. 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

  Although the shifting plan was discussed verbally, there was no evidence of a risk assessment being carried out 

  The  Master  and  the  Pilot  had  not  agreed  on  a  working  language  during  their  discussion  and  information 

for this operation; 

exchange; 

  The Pilot was using French rather than English to instruct the crew of the tugs; 

  The Master and bridge team did not intervene with the Pilot to verify commands given to the tugs in French. 

The immediate causes were determined to be: 

  The Pilot misjudged the tugs pushing power; 

  The pilot was giving instruction in a language which was not understood by the bridge team. 

 

 
A causal factor was inadequate communication – the Master failed to intervene with the Pilot when instructions 
to the tugs were given in a language he did not understand. 

The root causes were identified to be: 

  Risk considered tolerable – this was considered by the Pilot to be a routine recurring task; 

 

Inadequate Standards – there were no company procedures to cover the situation, particularly with regard to 
the working language on the bridge during navigational operations where Pilot/tug assistance is required. 

Our member took the following preventative actions: 

  Remind  Masters  that  they  should  override  the  Pilot’s  instructions  if  they  are  considered  to  be  incorrect  or 

unsafe; 

  Establish formal working language for ship’s movement at all times including berthing/un-berthing operations; 

  Ensure compliance with guidelines on relationship between Master, Officer of the watch (OOW) and Pilot. 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/16 covers mooring and cargo handling incidents.  Incident 1 – Vessel in collision with floating 
dock – is very similar to this incident and may be of interest to members. 

3  Near Miss: Dropped Object from Crane 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which there was a dropped object from a crane.  A protection bar 
from the small hook on the main crane came loose and fell from approximately 70m down to deck, leaving a small 
dent in the deck.   

This incident serves as a timely reminder.  Members are encouraged to: 

  Continue  the reporting of both ‘unsafe  conditions’ and ‘positive observations’ regarding dropped objects in 

order to share our experiences across vessels, sites and locations; 

  Continue with “dropped object searches” focusing on potential dropped objects.  In particular, check cranes, 

  Renew emphasis on the inclusion of dropped objects during work planning, toolbox talks, before and after work 

masts etc. on board for loose items; 

inspections. 

There are many dropped object incidents worthy of review.  This is the 27th dropped object incident published by 
IMCA in the last two years – over 9% of safety incidents reported by IMCA in the last two years have been dropped 
object incidents.  Members may wish to review some of the following incidents: 

IMCA SF 29/16 - October 2016 

5. Dropped Object Awareness  

IMCA SF 23/16 - September 2016  

1. Dropped Pallet During Loading of Stores 

2. High Potential Near Miss - Dropped Object 

3.Dropped Object Fell from Crane - Poor Communication/Lack Of Awareness/Control 
Of Work 

4. Dropped Object - Failure of Split Head Elbow on Bolts 

5. Working at Height - Use of Wooden Handled Hammers 

IMCA SF 22/16 - September 2016  

3. Potential dropped object during cargo offloading operations  

IMCA SF 16/16 - June 2016  

1. Dropped object: Signage dropped from crane boom 

IMCA SF 14/16 - May 2016  

1. Serious incident: Pad eye fell from crane boom and struck rigger 

2. Potential dropped object: Inbound cargo 

3. Dropped object: Tank dog 

IMCA SF 08/16 - April 2016  

5. Dropped object fell 12m and hit worker   

 

IMCA SF 02/16 - January 2016  

3. High potential near miss: Dropped object 

IMCA SF 21/15 - December 2015  

1. High Potential Near Miss: Safe Working Load (SWL) Plate Fell from Crane Auxiliary 
Block 

2. Dropped Object Near Miss: Small Parts Falling From Crane Rest  

IMCA SF 15/15 - October 2015 

1. Dropped Objects Fatalities: Workers Struck by Fallen Loads During Lifting Operations 

IMCA SF 14/15 - October 2015 

5. Dropped Object Near Miss Lifting 

6. Dropped Object Near Miss: ROV Wire Rope 

IMCA SF 11/15 - August 2015  

5. Near Miss Dropped Object: Protector Plate Drops from Crane 

IMCA SF 10/15 - July 2015  

1. Near Miss: Dropped Object Fell from Crane Boom 

2. Dropped Object Near Miss: Antenna Parts Worked Loose and Fell to Deck 

IMCA SF 06/15 - May 2015  

1. Objects Dropped from Pipelay Tower 

IMCA SF 02/15 - February 2015 

1. Dropped Object Near Miss: Falling Crane Block 

2. Dropped Object Near Misses 

3. Dropped Object - Failure of Lump Hammer 

IMCA SF 01/15 - January 2015  

5. High Potential Dropped Object 

4 

Fatalities – Pipe Fell from Skids 

The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP) has published the following safety alert regarding an 
incident in which two persons were killed when they 
were  crushed  under  a  pipe  that  fell  approximately 
60cm from wooden support skids.  

  The work permit system in place was rigorously applied to the known risks, but there was a lack of awareness 

A section of 36-inch gas export line they were working 
under  or  near  fell  off  the  approximately  60cm  high 
temporary wooden supports (skid stacks) and crushed 
them.    The  two  employees,  a  grinder  and  a  welder, 
were  completing  a  construction  weld  repair  at  the 
north-eastern-most  weld  joint  of  an  approximately 
120m curved section of the export pipeline. 

The IOGP report notes the following: 

of: 
  The  hazard  presented  by 

temporarily 
suspended pipes, which constituted a dynamic 
load / dropped object hazard 

  The hazard of thermal expansion, differential 
forces 
lateral  movement  of 

residual  pre-stress 

heating,  and 
contributing  to  the 
curved pipe segments. 

The full report can be found here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident 
(search word: pipe): 

 

IMCA SF 08/06 – Incident 2 – Serious injury during pipestalk rolling operation. 

 

 

 
5 

First Aid Injury – Electric Shock 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  ROV  Supervisor  suffered  an 
electric shock.  The incident occurred during ROV fault finding activities.  The ROV 
Supervisor  mistakenly  accessed  a  transformer  cabinet  in  the  ROV  Power 
Distribution  Unit  (PDU)  room  associated  with  a 2nd/alternate  ROV  system.    He 
made contact with a conductor inside the transformer cabinet and sustained an 
electric shock which resulted in a burn to the hand requiring first aid treatment. 

The power distribution system that was the focus of the fault finding activities was 
correctly isolated, inclusive of the discharge of stored capacitance energy, via the 
application of an HV spider earthing tool.  The ROV system mistakenly accessed was not in use at the time, with 
breakers switched to the off position.  However, it was receiving 40V DC from the Line Insulating Monitoring (LIM) 
system and was potentially a source of additional High Voltage stored capacitance energy. 

The lessons learned: 

  Personnel should not rely on administrative [safety] controls as the main form of defence; 

  Permit  to  work  and  job  hazard  analysis  are  important  planning  tools;  however,  these  should  be  used  in 

conjunction with hard controls at every opportunity; 

  Access to transformer cabinets and other HV energy sources should be restricted by way of lock out/tag out 

and a robust approval process; 

  Familiarisation with the configuration of systems associated with safety critical equipment at a specific work 

site should be verified before approval to work is granted; 

  The  importance of  clear labelling and  the ability of crew to  differentiate  between similar sets of  co-located 

equipment should be considered during installation of all safety critical equipment; 

  System-specific isolation checklists and procedures should be applied to safety critical equipment; 

  Stored energy should be released from offline equipment where operationally practicable; 

  The practice of ‘test before touch’ should be reinforced as a formal requirement prior to accessing any electrical 

systems component. 

Our members’ recommendations and corrective actions were as follows: 

  Review and update training and procedures to identify controls applicable to HV activities including: 

  ROV specific isolation checklist 
  Labelling / colour coding requirements for the ROV system  
  Cabinet lock management  
  Use of warning signs  
  Approved personal protective equipment (PPE) and hand tools  
  Rescue equipment, test before touch  
  Offline equipment isolation requirements  
  Adequacy of job hazard or risk analysis. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search word: shock): 

IMCA SF 15/14 – 440V electrical shock incident; 

IMCA SF 04/15 – Electric shock incident. 

Members may wish to refer to IMCA M 217 – Offshore vessel high voltage safety. 

 

 

 

 
6  Unsafe Boarding of Vessels  

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following safety alert regarding 
recent  reports  of  individuals  boarding  vessels  by  means  other  than  via  the 
gangway. 

There are a number of similarities between the incidents experienced; 

  The individuals doing this are not ship’s crew; 

  The incidents were taking place when the vessel is either preparing to sail or 

is coming alongside; 

  There was no gangway out at the time; 

 

Individuals were jumping aboard through open ship side doors.  

During the most recent incident, a surveyor from a classification society boarded 
the vessel whilst it was still being made fast, having just come alongside.  The side 
door had been open to facilitate monitoring of the launch and recovery of the 
rescue boat for survey purposes – however, the safety chain was across the space.  The surveyor removed the chain 
and jumped from the quayside onto the ship.  The aft mooring station had only just confirmed to the bridge the 
vessel was all fast, and the engines and thrusters were still running when the incident occurred. 

The full report can be found here.  Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: boarding): 

 

IMCA SF 04/16 – Incident 1 – Near miss: non-fatal man overboard incident. 

7 

Injury After Crewman Fell Downstairs On External Stairway 

The MSF has published the following safety alert regarding an incident in 
which  a  crewman  fell  down  the  stairs  and  was  injured.    The  incident 
occurred following recovery of the vessel’s daughter craft (DC) when the 
crewman had informed the Officers in the bridge that the small boat had 
been recovered and safely stowed.  He left the bridge and was making his 
way down the external stairway to the boat deck when he slipped and fell 
down the stairs to the deck below.  He broke his arm and was transferred 
from the vessel via helicopter to hospital.  

Investigation revealed the following: 

  The  stairs  were  in  good  condition  and  were  fitted  with  grips  which 

were in good condition; 

  The injured person was wearing all appropriate PPE, including his safety footwear, which was in good condition; 

  Weather: cloudy, wind force 3 knots, sea height 1-2m, although the IP stated the vessel rolled just prior to his 

fall; 

  The injured person stated he was using the trailing hand technique whilst going down the stairs, although he 

had a radio in his other hand; 

  There were no radio sling/holsters on board; 

  The incident occurred after the original work task had been completed.  This was identified as a trend in this 

particular vessel owners fleet. 

The full report can be found here.  Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: stairs, fell): 

 

IMCA SF 20/15 – Incident 1 – Recent slips, trips and falls involving stairs. 

 

