A

B

 

 

Keywords:  Corrosion 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/03 

July 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  Container Door Hinges Failure – Container Door Fell on Deck 

IMCA has received details of an incident highlighting dangers from the lack of maintenance to container doors. 

A container was being opened as illustrated in the two photographs below.  As the left hand door was opened the top hinge 
broke, followed by the second and third hinges, and the door fell onto the deck. 

Nobody was struck or injured during this incident. 

 

The cause of the incident was found to be lack of lubrication between the vertical rod and the hinges, which should rotate on 
the rod.  They had become corroded and jammed intermittently and had suffered fatigue due to opening and closing of the 
door resulting in cracking and eventually failure. 

The company has noted the following precautionary measures: 

  Container door hinges of this design should be routinely checked every time they come on board for signs of jamming, 

wear, tear, and lubrication applied accordingly; 

 

If lubrication and corrective actions are required on board, particularly to hinges in containers, then a non-conformance 
report should be submitted so that appropriate preventive measures can be taken. 

2  Fatality – Pressure Build-Up leading to Sudden Release of Mechanical Plug 

Keywords: Pressure 

A member has reported the following incident, whereby a mechanical plug installed inside a pipe to isolate hot work from 
process fluids released suddenly, striking and killing a welder. 

Results from the investigation indicate that the direct cause of the incident was blockage of the purge vent line on the back 
side of the plug due to freezing water vapour in the line.  This allowed pressure to build up and eject the plug. 

 

While  freezing  contributed  to  the  blockage  in  this  incident,  it  is  not  the  only  means  by  which  pressure  can  build-up.  
Given the routine use of these types of plugs in production operations, all relevant personnel should be made aware of the 
events in this incident and a review of isolation plug procedures is encouraged. 

The work in this incident involved a welding operation on the open end of a 28-inch produced water line that had residual 
water and hydrocarbons in it.  A non-pressure-containing mechanical plug, known as a ‘plumber’s plug’, had been installed 
about 12 inches inside the pipe, as a barrier against process fluids and purge gas.  About three hours before the incident, a 
nitrogen purge was established through a fitting in the plug to inert the pipe area behind the plug.  The nitrogen came from a 
nearby supply header operating at 25-30 psig.  The purge gas was routed to the plug from the header via a ¾-inch flexible 
hose.  Another ¾-inch hose was connected to the top of the pipe behind the plug and routed outside the module to vent the 
vapors.  The ambient temperature was 0ºF at the time of the incident.  A hand valve was used to pinch the flow of purge gas 
from the nitrogen header.  There was no pressure gauge, regulator, or secondary relief on the purge to allow pressure to be 
checked  or  to  prevent  pressure  build-up.    A  job  safety  analysis  (JSA)  recognized  the  potential  hazard  of  the  purge  line 
freezing.    To  mitigate  the  risk,  the  line  was  checked  periodically  for  flow  by  placing  a  hand  at  the  end  of  the  vent  hose.  
This check subsequently proved to be inadequate.  When the vent line froze, the pressure build-up behind the plug caused 
the 63-pound plug to release suddenly, striking and killing the welder and inflicting minor injuries on two other workers. 

The primary lesson learned is recognition of the risk associated with potential pressure build-up behind plugs that are not 
intended  to  hold  pressure.    When  purging  systems  using  such  plugs,  procedures  should  address  the  size  of  inlet  and  vent 
hoses, placement of vent hoses, use of regulators to control flow, use of secondary pressure relief to prevent overpressure, 
positioning of workers away from the plug, and work crew training and hazard awareness.  Where possible, the best option 
is to design tie-ins so that isolation plugs between hot work and hydrocarbons are not needed.  In addition to the ‘plumber’s 
plug’, the company involved is evaluating alternative plug types when isolation is needed.  These alternatives include double-
sealing hydraulic plugs (Car-Ber type) and pressure rated plugs (Thaxton) that have the potential to be used with or without 
purging. 

The investigation report also identified potential issues with JSA and lesson learned processes at the work site.  While the 
JSA had identified the vent freeze-up hazard, the risk had not been properly mitigated.  In addition, the crew doing the work 
was not directly involved in the JSA.  A similar near-miss occurred earlier in the year when a 4-inch plug blew out due to a 
malfunction  of  the  pressure  regulator  on  the  purge  gas.    Lessons  from  that  event  did  not  get  incorporated  into  existing 
procedures. 

The company is reviewing its JSA and lesson learned processes as described below and has sought examples of best practices 
and lessons learned from its employees’ experiences with use of such plugs for wider sharing. 

Inside  
module 

Outside 
module

N 2 bleed  
hose,  
routed  
outside 

Bleed 
barrel

Blind flange 
isolation

 

 

m

People in  odule: 
1. Welder 
2. Grinder #1 
3.  rinder #  
 Firewatc  h
5. Laborer 
6. Welder’s helper 

4. 

G

2

5 

Plumber’s plug post 
incident (20’ away)

Transition 

Piece

2

3

1

6

4

N2 supply  
hose 

Plumber’s plug & 
hose pre- incident

28” Produced Water Pipe

28” pig  

launcher/receiver 

The company has provided the following summary of actions and lessons learned following the incident: 

Hose connected to N2 header (25 -30 psi)

  Rigorous review by engineering and operations staff of mechanical plugs, including specifications and design criteria; 

  Evaluation of alternative technologies (Car-Ber) to potentially reduce or eliminate the need for nitrogen purges; 

1  Contractor workgroup formed: 

  Revise procedures accordingly. 

2  Hazard recognition addressed: 

monitoring programme was used; 

  Although  the  importance  of  monitoring  the  vent  hose  was  known  and  noted  in  the  hot  work  permit,  no  rigorous 

  Several hazards had not been identified during the JSA/STA process: 

–  The N2 would absorb the water left in the 28” pipe; 
–  The absorbed water would condense and freeze in the vent hose; 
–  Very low pressure would exert large forces on a large diameter plug; 

  A company standard is to be developed for hazard analysis for all work, including routine jobs, on its work permit task 
hazard  checklist,  including  JSAs,  STAs,  JHAs,  SETA  cards,  unit  work  permits,  task  hazard  checklists  and  authority  to 
proceed. 

3 

Effectiveness of lessons learned process reviewed: 

  Learnings from an earlier ‘near miss’ (where a regulator had malfunctioned, leading to increased nitrogen pressure) had 

not been enough to prevent this incident; 

  Although  company  procedures  were  updated  periodically,  relevant  procedures  are  also  to  be  reviewed  whenever  a 
report  of  lessons  learned  is  issued.    The  company  will  use  its  own  network  to  improve  sharing  of  safety  information 
among its global assets. 

4 

Purging, cold cutting and welding on process piping procedure updated: 

  First choice to isolate piping so that a plug is not needed; 

 

 

  Where a plug is needed, one not requiring the use of interting, such as a Car-Ber plug, is to be selected; 

If only a plug requiring an inert purge is needed, a job-specific procedure is to be prepared, addressing: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 

the size and pressure rating of inlet and vent hoses; 
the placement of vent hoses (inside/outside); 
the use of low pressure gauges at the inlet of the plug and on the backside of the plug; 
the use of regulators and pressure relief; 
the positioning of workers away from mechanical plugs; 
training and work plans for the crew involved, including assigning a crew member to continuously monitor pressures 
and inert gas flow rate; 

  Requirements to be clearly communicated through updated procedures. 

5  Re-emphasising the importance of being safety-aware at all times, including before and during ‘routine’ tasks: 

  Think hard about the risks of every task undertaken – even routine tasks! 

  Don’t be complacent about risks, just because you’ve done a job lots of times 

  Every welding job is unique – you must stop, think and go! 

3  Attempted Service to Microwave Results in Fatal Electrocution 

Keyword:  Power 

An  experienced  electrician  (12 years  with  the  company)  opened  up  a  microwave  in  order  to  service  it,  in  spite  of  dire 
warnings not to do so.  A warning label, prominently displayed on the machine, clearly indicated the potential for high voltage 
as follows: 

“Warning – High voltage and microwave energy.  Do not remove any cover.  Caution – Always disconnect the mains plug 
from the wall socket before servicing.  The unit contains no user-serviceable parts.  Refer servicing to authorised personnel.  
This unit contains dangerous voltages.” 

He put a tester across the disconnected leads with the power on (several thousand volts).  The current went to the ground 
through  his  body,  via  the  ice-making  machine  next  to  where  he  was  working  –  burn  marks  confirm  this.    The  incident 
resulted in a fatality. 

To address this incident, the company has issued the following instruction to its personnel: 

“With immediate effect the on-site repair of domestic equipment which contains high voltage components is strictly prohibited 
(such  equipment  includes  microwave  ovens,  television  sets,  PC  monitors,  electrical  insect  killers,  etc).    These types  of 
equipment should be returned to an authorised vendor for repair.” 

4  Cracked Fuel Line Results in an Engine Fire 

Keyword: Ignition 

We  have  received  a  report  of  the  following  incident,  whereby  a  vessel’s  fire  detection  system  indicated  fire  in  the  engine 
room.    Engine  emergency  shut  down  was  initiated  and  all  personnel  proceeded  to  their  relevant  muster  points.    The  fire 
alarm sounded and the local crew responded immediately to the fire.  During this time, the mechanic had already shut down 
engine #1 and extinguished the fire, using the fire station’s 30kg CO2 extinguisher.  The fire was extinguished without causing 
further damage. 

The subsequent investigation noted a hairline (2mm) crack in the fuel line from the left hand fuel manifold to cylinder #3.  
The fuel had come into contact with heat from the exhaust manifold, where it had ignited and caused the fire.   

It  was  found  that  there  was  had  been  a  lack  of  inspections  and  maintenance  on  this  equipment.    The  investigation  also 
revealed an inadequate design. 

To address this problem the company instructed personnel to: 

  Examine the condition of all fuel lines daily; 

  Visually inspect clamp rubbers and general condition; 

 

Keyword: Gas 

  Check torque of connections and fuel line clamps; 

 

Install double-coated fuel line on all engines. 

5  Exposure to CO2 release from Dry Ice Storage 

IMCA has learned of the following incident whereby an unexpected hazard arose when stowing refrigerated stores.  A vessel 
was in the process of mobilising for a prolonged spell offshore and had ordered a significant amount of food stores, which 
arrived  in  a  non-refrigerated  truck.    Fresh  vegetables  and  fresh  milk  had  been  loaded  into  the  fridge,  to  be  stored  by  a 
steward. 

While  storing  the milk  and  vegetables, the steward  began  to  feel unwell.    He  was  relieved  by  the  chief  cook,  who  almost 
immediately detected a strange atmosphere and felt unwell as well.  He left the fridge and was noticed by the first officer to 
be unsteady on his feet as he was climbing the stairs near the food stowage area. The first officer assisted the chief cook up 
the  stairwell  to  an  office,  where  the  steward  was  still  recovering  from  what  was  initially  assumed  to  have  been  a  cold 
operating environment.  The steward received oxygen as a precaution.  He was transported to a local medical care facility for 
further evaluation and released to full duty.  The chief cook recovered immediately after leaving the area. 

An  ‘all  stop’  was  called  and  the  area  was  evacuated.    Ventilation  and  appropriate  PPE  were  utilised  to  carry  out  an 
investigation.  During early investigations it was found that the (fridge) area was oxygen deficient.  At this time, the type and 
concentration of gas were undeterminable. 

A  refrigeration  technician  was  requested  and  arrived  on  board  later  that  day.    He  was  able  to  confirm,  with  detection 
equipment, that the gas was carbon dioxide.  The CO2 was found to be emanating from solid CO2 blocks used to pack the 
fresh milk. This had not been noticed as the stores had been loaded, but as it evaporated into the atmosphere in and around 
the stowage area, it had caused a build up of CO2 which displaced the oxygen content. 

All  actions  taken  were  analysed  by  using  a  job  safety  analysis  process  to  identify  all  hazards  and  the  appropriate  steps  to 
mitigate each.  The two crew members entering the contaminated area used self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) and 
removed  all  packages  of  milk  and  the  CO2  blocks  to  outside  the  vessel,  where  the  CO2  would  safely  dissipate.  
The refrigeration unit was then restarted and the area was ventilated overnight to ensure complete discharge of the gas. 

Historically,  only  frozen  goods  had  come  with  dry  ice  packing  which,  in  this  instance,  caused  an  unidentified  hazard  to  be 
brought into the confined space stowage area by the galley crew. 

The company involved has noted the following lessons learned: 

  Confined  or  enclosed  spaces  may  present  hazards  such  as  oxygen-deficient  or  enriched  atmospheres,  flammable 

atmospheres, toxics atmospheres, or a combination of these; 

  When working in confined areas, it is extremely important that personnel maintain awareness of their environment and 
the  problems  that  result  when  foreign  substances  are  released  into  the  atmosphere.    In  this  case  it  was  dry  ice  that 
caused the problem. 

  Through the actions of the crew in evacuating, ventilating, conducting atmospheric testing, completing a JSA and using 

SCBA to remove the dry ice before re-entering the enclosed environment, a more serious scenario was avoided. 

6  Lifeboat Davit Sheave Incident  

Keywords:  Lifeboat 

A member has reported an incident involving a lifeboat davit sheave that occurred during routine planned maintenance. 

On completion of tests, run according to the company’s standard procedures, personnel had re-boarded the vessel using the 
lifeboat  embarkation  ladder  and  the  operation  to  recover  the  lifeboat  to  deck  was  commenced.    The  boat  reached 
approximately 1 metre above the deck when a loud noise was heard.  The operation was stopped immediately. 

Close inspection revealed that one of the davit sheaves had disintegrated around its perimeter (circumference) and that this, 
in  turn,  had  caused  the  falls  wire  to  jump  clear  of  the  sheave  and  become  trapped  between  the  sheave  face  and  sheave 
bracket on the davit structure (see figure). 

 

Safety Flash 

 

