AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/14 

Safety Flash 

    June 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

This safety flash concentrates on one single issue - fires in engine room spaces – as there have been 
several such incidents reported recently.  

1  Serious Engine Room Fire Whilst Divers in Saturation 

A  member  has  reported  a  very  serious  incident  in  which  there  was  a  fire  in  the  engine  room  of  an  offshore  vessel.  The 
incident  occurred  whilst  the  vessel  was  alongside,  but  there  were  divers  in  saturation  at  the  time.  The  incident  happened 
when a leak of diesel fuel, under pressure, ignited at the secondary duplex fuel filter on an engine. Only one engine - main 
engine 1 on the port side was running at the time, supplying all vessel systems.  

During routine maintenance work, the engineers became aware of flames near the exhaust or waste gate and at secondary 
fuel filter of the main engine that was running. An engineer attempted to get to an emergency stop location, but that moment 
the  fire  expanded  explosively  and  within  seconds  engulfed  the  forward  section  of  the  engine  in  a  ball  of  fire,  and  he  was 
driven back, but managed to escape. Emergency procedures were followed including closing of valves, stopping of fans and 
engines and shutting of all watertight doors. The Hi-Fog Mist system was activated, and the fire was extinguished. 

When the general fire alarm sounded, the Diving Superintendent was informed and all diving personnel were mustered. All 
the divers in saturation were transferred to the Hyperbaric Rescue Craft (HRC) and the transfer trunking was brought to 
surface. The seal on the HRC was confirmed. The dive system was switched to emergency power supply and the HRC made 
ready to launch. The crane was made ready to lift the HRC from the vessel if required. Once the situation was contained, the 
divers were able to return to the saturation complex to continue decompression. All divers completed their decompression 
without further issue. 

Everyone escaped safely; no-one was injured. The fire had the potential to have caused multiple fatalities. There was serious 
fire damage to the port engine room and mezzanine deck level equipment and service wiring.  

Our member wished to record that: 

♦  The  conduct  and  actions  of  the  Chief  Engineer,  1st  Engineer  and  both  2nd  Engineers  were  carried  out  quickly, 
professionally  and  as  safely  as  possible,  their  actions  and  the  speed  of  their  response  greatly  reduced  the  significant 
potential of this very serious incident; 

♦  The  emergency  response  and  swift  actions  of  the  Diving  Superintendent,  Diving  Supervisors,  Life  Support  Technicians 

and Divers demonstrated a professional and very competent response;  

♦  The Vessel Master, Chief Mate, Offshore Manager and Client Site Representative all contributed professionally and very 

competently during this incident. 

 

Figure 1: Typical fuel filter of the sort that failed 

Figure 2: Failed fuel filter unit 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Top of filter showing bolt hole and extruded O ring 

Figure 4: Sheared bolt 

 

 

 

Figures 5 and 6: Failed stud 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

♦  With regard to the vessel and its crew: 

systems on-board the vessel 

above scheduled requirements  

−  The  engine  room  personnel  were  very  experienced,  qualified  and  competent  in  the  engineering  processes  and 

−  The vessel preventative maintenance system was well applied, actioned and documented and in many cases over and 

−  The  starboard  engine  room  (undamaged)  was  found  to  be  clean  and  very  well  maintained  which  provides  an 

indication of the professionalism of the vessel engineers  

−  The  vessel  had  been  in  operation  for  four  years.  Fuel  filter  maintenance  has  been  carried  out  in  excess  of  stated 

requirements in order to cater for extended dynamic positioning (DP) operations. 

♦  With regard to the failed equipment that was found to be the cause of the fire: 

−  The Bollfilter Duplex Filter units had been in service since the vessel was commissioned in 2010  

−  Detailed analysis of the failed stud showed that: 

-  One of the three studs broke by high cycle low stress fatigue 
-  One stud contained a short fatigue crack 
-  The primary cause of cracking was insufficient preload tension in the studs due to insufficient tightening of the 

nuts  

-  The stud was manufactured from good quality creep resistant steel; 

−  Activation  of  the  fuel  quick  closing  valve(s)  was  undertaken  but  main  engine  4  (which  had  been  started  as  the 

♦ 

 With regard to the fire itself: 

burning engine was shut down) continued running; 

♦  The immediate cause of the incident was found to be: 

−  One of the three filter housing cover stud bolts failed by high cycle, low stress fatigue as a result of insufficient pre-
load tension in the studs due to insufficient tightening. This led to a loss of pressure integrity of the filter housing and 
the ‘O’ ring seal was extruded through the housing/lid interface. This allowed fuel at pressure to spray onto a turbo 
charger exhaust manifold, causing a fire;  

♦  The underlying causes of the incident were found to be: 

− 

− 

Filter unit in line and in close proximity to the engine turbo charger exhaust (750mm) 

Failed stud in direct line of engine turbo charger exhaust 

−  No physical barrier between the fuel filter and the potential ignition source of the engine turbo charger exhaust. The 

cladding around the exhaust does not provide 100% cover 

 

present or at access/exit location 

engine room 

−  No  local  fuel  shut  off  valve  in  close  proximity  to  the  forward  engine  space  and  areas  where  personnel  may  be 

−  No  local  Hi-Fog  Water  Mist  activation  facility  in  the  forward  engine  bay  in  the  vicinity  of  the  access  way  to  the 

− 

Fuel shut off valve was a considerable distance from the engine bay and the vicinity of the fuel supply;  

♦  The root causes of the incident were found to be: 

− 

Lack  of  stud  bolt  torque  information  available  from  either  the  vessel  planned  maintenance  system  or  the  filter 
manufacturers documentation 

−  Vessel design: Fuel system location in close proximity to systems at auto-ignition temperatures  

−  Vessel design: limited mitigation and recovery systems in the event of a fuel related event with personnel working in 

the engine room. 

Our member took the following actions: 

♦ 

Immediate full visual inspection of all stud bolts in all other fuel filter units;  

♦  Replaced all studs in filter assemblies and tightened sufficiently to attain pre-load tension. Supplied information back to 

the fuel filter manufacturer such that torque settings were provided and included in the manual; 

♦  Fire retardant blankets were placed over remaining in-service filter housing in an attempt to prevent a similar event from 

occurring. 

Our member took the following recommendations: 

♦  Fuel supply system:   

−  Review  the  design  of  the  secondary  duplex  fuel  filter  locations  to  assess  if  the  filter  housings  could  be  re-located 
away  from  the  vicinity  of  the  turbo  changer  exhaust  manifolds  for  each  engine.  If  the  filters  were  able  to  be  re-
located in compliance with technical considerations, relocate to a position away from the engine exhaust manifolds 
and other extreme heat sources  

−  There  were  no  physical  barriers  between  the  secondary  duplex  fuel  filter  housing  and  the  engine  turbo  charger 
exhaust manifold. Provide physical barrier between the filter housing and all surfaces with a potential temperature at 
or above auto-ignition temperature to prevent fuel being sprayed towards the auto-ignition heat source; 

♦  Response to an engine room fire; 

close to the exit of the engine room:  

♦  Provide for local fuel shut-off facility at the forward end of each engine if technically feasible. Position should be at, or 

− 

− 

Provide  for  Hi-Fog  Water  Mist  activation  in  each  access  way  of  the  port  and  starboard  engine  room  exit  area  if 
technically feasible. Position should be at, or close to the exit of the engine room 

Fuel  Emergency  Shut-off  systems  -  Investigate  further  the  action  of  the  Quick  Closing  fuel  shut-off  valves,  as  the 
activation  of  the  quick  closing  shut-off  valves  did  not  starve  all  engines  of  fuel.  When  activated,  main  engine  4 
continued to run. 

This  incident  forms  part  of  an  IMCA  Safety  Flash  dealing  solely  with  incidents  concerning  fires  in  engine  room  spaces. 
However, members may wish to refer to the following incident, reported by the Marine Safety Forum, which had the exact 
same cause – shearing of bolts allowing fuel to leak onto a hot surface, causing a fire. (key words: bolt, sheared, fire).  

♦ 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 8: Engine Room Fire on Offshore Vessel 

2  Fire in Engine Room on Platform Supply Vessel 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a fire in the engine room on a platform supply vessel. The vessel was 
on its way to port from an oil platform, when it was decided on board to run a full power test on the  propulsion system 
which included running all five diesel generators. This is a normal routine conducted on board approximately every month 
according to the vessel’s planned maintenance system.   

Subsequently the fire alarm was sounded on the bridge. The bridge called the engine control room. The chief engineer was in 
the engine control room where he already had started to prepare for the full power test. When the bridge called, he had 
already  detected  a  fire  located  at  diesel  generator  number  5  and  confirmed  this  to  the  bridge.  At  the  same  moment  he 
manually  released  the  ‘flexi  fog’  fire  extinguishing  system  above  the  generator  and  started  to  shut  down  the  propulsion 

 
engines.  In  the  meantime  the  crew  attended  their  muster  stations  and  prepared  themselves  according  to  the  vessel’s 
Emergency Plan.  

After  a  short  time  the  fire  appeared  to  be  extinguished  by  the  ‘flexi  fog’  fire  extinguishing  system.  The  Master  decided  to 
send down members of the crew wearing breathing apparatus (BA) sets. Initially this was not possible owing to smoke and 
fumes,  but  once  the  smoke  and  fumes  had  cleared  they  were  able  to  enter.  When  they  arrived  at  the  fire  area  they 
discovered small flames above the generator which were rapidly extinguished using a fire hose. 

Whilst  there  were  no  injuries,  there  was  significant  damage  caused  by  the  fire.  A  lot  of  power  and  signalling  cabling  was 
destroyed,  resulting  in  the  vessel  losing  propulsion  and  manoeuvring  ability.  A  tug  boat  was  ordered  and  the  vessel  was 
towed to a shipyard for repairs. This resulted in six weeks off hire for the vessel.  

 

 

 

Figures 7 and 8: showing damage to the engine room following the fire 

 

 

 

 

 

Figures 9 and 10: showing the broken nipple on the lubrication oil pipe which led to the oil leakage 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The  direct  cause  of  the  fire  was  discovered  to  be  a  broken  lubrication  oil  pipe  fitting  leading  from  the  generator’s 
engine block to a lubricating oil cyclone filter. This had resulted into an oil mist spraying out from the broken pipe. This 
oil mist was ignited by a source on the diesel generator or near by the generator; 

 
♦  The root causes of the fire were determined to be: 

−  Design  weakness  -  The  piping  arrangement  of  the  lubrication  system  had  a  weakness  on  a  pipe  nipple  which 

resulted in to an oil leakage 

−  Location of the smoke/fire detectors – When two of the fire detectors were activated the ‘flexi fog’  should 
automatically  be  released.  It  was  considered  that  this  did  not  occur  because  the  fire  was  not  detected  by  one  of 
detectors above the generator - due to a poor location. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

♦  The  oil  cyclone  filter  and  associated  piping  was  removed  and  the  lubrication  oil  pipe  connection  on  the  engine  block 
permanently blanked off. This was done after the manufacturer of the engine was consulted about the necessity of the 
lubrication oil cyclone filter; 

♦  The location and direction of the existing fire detectors was adjusted;  

♦  Additional fire detectors were installed in the engine room to ensure enhanced fire monitoring and detection. 

Engine room fires form a recurring theme in IMCA safety flashes. Typically the root causes of such fires are failures in house-
keeping or planned maintenance, or failure to recognise fire hazards and  address risks. Members may wish to refer to the 
following similar incidents (key words: engine, room, fire): 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 08/03 – Incident 4: Cracked fuel line results in engine room fire; 

IMCA SF 10/05 – Incident 2: Engine room fire; 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 8: Engine room fire on offshore vessel; 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 6: Pressure switch location: fixed fire suppression systems. 

3  Fire in Engine Space on CTV (Crew Transfer Vessel)   

An incident has been bought to IMCA’s attention in which there was a small fire in the starboard engine space on a crew 
transfer  vessel  used  in  the  offshore  wind  farm  sector.  The  incident  occurred  when  on  passage  to  an  offshore  wind  farm. 
Shortly after leaving port, the fire alarm was activated in the starboard engine. Dark smoke was observed coming from the 
drain hole in the after inspection hatch of the starboard engine. On the CCTV into the engine space there was no indication 
of flames.   

The starboard engine was shut down and full fire procedures were carried out. The CO2 system was also used, however on 
inspection after the incident it was found that the system had not deployed. Shore authorities were alerted and the vessel 
returned to port on one engine. All staff were safely landed ashore and the fire confirmed to be extinguished.  

Investigation of the fire revealed the following: 

all was found to be in order; 

the exhaust system; 

♦  Normal checks on the engines and inspection of the engine and jet spaces had been carried out before the voyage, and 

♦  The immediate cause of the fire was a rubber drain hose from a hatch combing catching fire as it was in contact with 

♦  Although the drain pipe was heat resistant and the main engine exhaust was covered in thermal insulation, the drain pipe 

was badly positioned, crossing over the exhaust system; 

♦  The flames from the burning pipe were extinguished by oxygen starvation as a result of the shutdown of the engine fans 

and ventilators. The CO2 smothering system was not actually deployed. 

♦  Drain  pipe  on  both  engines  replaced  with  a  suitable  thermally  protected  pipe  which  was  run  clear  of  any  possible 

The following actions were taken with regard to the fire: 

exposure to damage from the exhaust system; 

♦  A general focus on pipe inspections was produced and circulated;  

♦  Fire drills and specific vessel training to be updated to reflect lessons learnt from this incident.  

Investigation of why the CO2 system did not deploy revealed the following: 

♦  The valve to the engine space had not been opened; 

♦  The pin had not been removed from the valve head;  

 
♦ 

 A brass lever had been forced in the wrong direction causing it to shear; 

♦  The instructions for the activation and effective use of the CO2 system were not adequate to purpose; 

♦  They were located on the external surface of the drop down access door;  

♦  They are not readily visible to crew operating the system; 

♦  They did not highlight the need to remove the safety pin on the activation lever of the cylinder; 

The following actions were taken with regard to the failure to deploy the CO2 smothering system: 

♦  Better  and  more  detailed  operating  instructions  issued  to  vessels  with  similar  CO2  smothering  systems  –  including 

♦  Ensured that all crew members were fully conversant with the fixed fire fighting system fitted to the vessel and how to 

pictorial instructions for use; 

operate that fire fighting system. 

 

Figure 11: Drain hole from which smoke was sighted 

 

Figure  12:  Scorched  drain  pipe  which  was  immediate 
cause of fire 

 

Figure 13: The activation lever on the starboard cylinder was broken off but the cylinder had not 

 

been activated 

 

 

 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

Figure 14: Both selector valves to the port and starboard engine were in the closed position 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: engine, space, fire):  

IMCA SF 08/03 – Incident 4: Cracked fuel line results in engine room fire; 

IMCA SF 10/05 – Incident 2: Engine room fire; 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 6: Pressure switch location: fixed fire suppression systems. 

 

4  Engine Room Fire    

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which a fire occurred in an engine 
room  space.  The  result  was  a  blackout  situation,  a  temporary  loss  of  propulsion  and  damage  to  engine  room  equipment, 
wiring etc. There were no injuries or environmental impact sustained due to this incident, however the potential for a less 
favourable outcome was present. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.28.pdf. 

This incident forms one of a number which have occurred recently which have been collected together and issued  as one 
single IMCA Safety Flash.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: engine, fire): 

IMCA SF 08/03 –  Incident 4: Cracked Fuel Line Results in an Engine Fire; 

IMCA SF 10/05 – Incident 2: Engine room fire; 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 8: Engine room fire on offshore vessel. 

