AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/10 

Safety Flash 

November 2010 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Falling Object  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  falling  object  hit  and  destroyed  someone’s  hard  hat.    Two  third-party 
ironworkers were setting the upper section of a structural steel tower.  Having set the section in place one worker left the 
immediate structure area and boarded the aerial lift so that he could access the very upper structure of the tower section, in 
order  to  release  the  rigging  from  the  mobile  crane  used  to  set  the  tower.    The  other  worker  (approximately  10  metres 
below) continued to tighten the bolts of the upper section to the already established lower section using an impact wrench. 

As the worker was manoeuvring the basket of the aerial lift, and properly tied off, his safety lanyard got caught on his tools 
(attached to his tool belt) and flipped a sleever bar sideways in its sheath causing the bar to flip out and fall.  The bar fell and 
struck the hard hat of the worker piercing the hard hat.  The hard hat fell off the worker and fell an additional distance to the 
ground below.  There were no injuries. 

At the time of the incident a ground person was assigned as a dedicated safety watch to make sure no one entered the work 
area as the two workers were positioning and attaching the tower section.  Additionally, the area had been barricaded with a 
danger tape. 

Figure 1 - hard hat destroyed by falling sleever bar 

 

The following corrective actions were suggested: 

♦  Only tools essential to complete assigned tasks should be carried in tool belts; 

♦  More appropriate tool belts and holders should be developed to prevent tools falling from height; 

♦  Persons should not work directly below areas where work at height is being conducted; 

♦  Emphasis  to  employees  of  the  importance  of  full  communications  and  heightened  safety  awareness  when  working  in 

areas where overhead fall object hazards exist. 

 
Members attention is drawn to IMCA safety promotional material on working at height and dropped objects. The cards and 
posters are available for download from https://members.imca-int.com/documents/core/sel/safetypromo.  

♦  Pocket Safety Cards: 

IMCA SPC06 on working at height 
IMCA SPC12 on dropped objects.  

♦  Safety Posters: 

– 
– 

– 
– 

IMCA SPP 03 Working at height – safe use of ladders 
IMCA SPP 04 Avoiding dropped objects. 

♦ 

‘Working at height’ DVD. 

2  Crewman Fatally Injured During Mooring Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman suffered fatal injuries after being hit by a snapping chain and mooring 
rope connection.  The incident occurred during mooring operations whilst manoeuvring two vessels together.  

At the project worksite, one vessel was being manoeuvred towards the appointed workplace using a mooring line and winch. 
Rigging  was  slackened  by  the  winch  on  one  vessel;  then  the  angle  between  the  two  vessels  increased,  which  caused  an 
increase in tension.  At that moment the chain snapped at the pad-eye connection on one vessel, and a deckhand was hit by 
the chain and mooring rope as it swung across the deck causing fatal injuries.  
 

Figure 1 - vessels move towards appointed workplace 

Figure 2 - Position of crewman in line of fire (green circle) 

 

 

Figure 3 - Path of chain after failure under tension 

 

 

 

 
Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The deckhand moved into ‘in the line of fire’ in the path of the breaking chain; 

♦  The breaking strain of the equipment used was underestimated in relation to the work being undertaken; 

♦  Limited communication and poor sight lines between vessel masters, winch operator and deckhand were a factor. 

 

 
 

 

 

Figure 4 - Snapped chain  

    

 Figure 5 - Mooring rope similar to that used in 

 

 

 the operation 

Our member made the folllowing recommendations: 

♦  Thorough revision of company procedures and risk assessments for this task, including types of connection, winches and 

towing equipment, and communications; 

♦  Ensure all persons involved are involved in toolbox talks before this task; 

♦  Check certification and fitness for use of all lifting and towing equipment (bollards, ‘bridle’ connection, wires, ropes);   

♦  Establish clear communication (radio, signals and visibility) between the master of the towing/pushing vessel, the crane or 

winch operator and any personnel on deck. 

 

Figure 6 - Scene of incident (green line indicates towing line, red line indicates snapped towing line) 

Position of crewman 

 

 

Perhaps  the  most  important  point  highlighted  by  our  member  is  that  crew  should  take  great  care  in  their  movements  on 
deck in relation to possible danger from equipment failure, particularly with regard to ropes, towing and rigging equipment. 

 
3  Precautions Against Jellyfish Sting During Diving Operations 

A member has reported that there has recently been a significant increase in the number of jellyfish in areas where previously 
few  jellyfish  had  been  encountered.    Apart  from  the  obvious  risk  of  stinging,  there  is  evidence  of  further  medical  issues 
associated with diving in the vicinity of jellyfish.  This has become an increased problem in summer months. 

On contacting jellyfish, there is a tendency for particles of tentacles to become attached to the diver’s suit.  If these particles 
are  not  removed  during  the  cleaning  process,  ‘dust’  remains  on  the  surface  of  the  suit  during  the  drying  process  and  can 
become airborne when returned to the diving chamber.  Some divers may be allergic to this and suffer ill-effects. 

When diving in an area suspected of being populated with jellyfish, members are encouraged to adopt a thorough cleaning 
routine and to take the following additional precautions: 

♦  Risk of jellyfish sting should be included in the job safety analysis (JSA) and risk assessments for diving tasks; 

♦  Umbilical recovery should always be carried out using gloves; 

♦  After locking out, dive suits should be pressure washed with fresh water and thoroughly rinsed; 

♦  Dive suits may then be dipped in the cleaning tank, and not prior to pressure wash, as this will result in contaminating 

the tank; 

procedure; 

♦  Consideration should be given to the use of over-suits which should be removed prior to re-entering the bell; 

♦  Divers’ umbilicals should be visually inspected and scrubbed (as required) on entry to the bell; 

♦  Ensure  ship  medic  and  diver  medic  technician  (DMT)  are  made  aware  of  jellyfish  danger  and  understand  first  aid 

♦  Prior to locking cleaned and dried suits into the system they should be checked for surface residue (normally in the form 

of a “white” flaky coating).  If present it should be cleaned to remove the contaminant. 

If these cleaning processes are not adhered to, the contamination on the suits can become ‘atomised’ during the blow-down 
(into saturation) process resulting in atmospheric dust.  Through consultation with experts involved in the study of jellyfish, it 
has become recognised that dried jellyfish particulates can be an irritant specifically resulting in coughing while others in the 
fishing industry have recognised that dried nets can also result in skin rash during periods where high levels of jellyfish have 
been encountered. 

 

Figure 1 -  Jellyfish 

 

 

 

 

 

Safety Flash 

4  Fatality – Fall from Height 

A member has reorted an incident in which a worker was killed, falling 19 meters from a column walkway. The person was a 
fitter putting in place a final piece of grating on an overhead walkway (see Figure.1 below). The worker was standing on a 
platform made from two planks. As the worker was moving the grating, one plank fell down causing the worker to swing, 
lose his balance and fall to his death. 

Figure 1 -  Location from which worker fell 

 

Members are encouraged to remind their personnel of the following basic safety principles when working at height: 

♦  When working at height with fall exposure, 100% fall protection should be required; 

♦  Personnel working at height should be properly trained to use fall protection devices; 

♦  Personnel working at height should wear full body harnesses fitted with lanyards; 

♦  Fall arrest equipment should be carefully inspected before and after each use; 

♦  Temporary platforms should be properly secured;  

♦  Platforms  and  walkways  shall  be  kept  free  from  obstacles  such  as  materials,  equipment,  tools  and  rubbish,  etc.,  which 

might fall or obstruct safe working activities. 

Members  are  reminded  of  IMCA’s  safety  promotional  material  on  working  at  height,  which  includes  safety  pocket  cards, 
posters and a DVD: 

♦  Safety pocket card IMCA SPC 06 Working at height; 

♦  Safety posters IMCA SPP 03 Working at height: Safe use of ladders  and IMCA SPP 04 Avoiding dropped objects; 

♦  Working at height DVD which promotes the need for safety awareness, discusses various hazards and provides real-life 
demonstrations of good practice. It is available in both PAL and NTSC formats and is subtitled in key languages for use 
with a variety of offshore workforces.  

