AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/11 

July 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of Fall Wire − Update to Safety Flash 05/11 

Members  will  recall  that  the  UK  Marine  Accident  Investigation  Branch  (MAIB)  published  Safety  Bulletin  1/11  regarding  the 
failure of a fall wire which caused a rescue boat to fall into the sea, with a subsequent fatality.     

Following further findings regrading this incident, the UK MAIB has published a second Safety Bulletin 2/11 (attached) on this 
incident.  The failure of the fall wire was the result of the malfunction of a proximity switch.  The incident occurred as the 
rescue boat reached its stowed position on the davit following a monthly drill.  Hoisting was not stopped before the davit 
reached its stowed position. The proximity switch, that should have cut electrical power to the winch motor before the davit 
reached its stops, failed to function. The rescue boat and its four crew members fell nearly 29 metres into the water below. 
One of the boat’s crew members had died and two were hospitalised. 

Further information can be found at www.maib.gov.uk/cms_resources/SB2-11.pdf. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Safety Flash 

 

