AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/07 

Safety Flash 

August 2007 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of Welding on Hyperbaric Rescue Chamber Medical Lock Door Assembly  

A member has reported that a weld failed on the medical lock door assembly of a hyperbaric rescue chamber.  The incident 
occurred during a pressure test of the system and an employee sustained serious injuries after being struck by the displaced 
medical lock door. 

A report commissioned by the company, conducted by an independent metallurgical laboratory, identified that the welds in 
the  bracket  could  have  failed  at  any  time  due  to  there  being  less  than  1 mm  of  weld  remaining.    This  was  partly  due  to 
corrosion of the metal and partly due to poor welding. 

It was calculated that a downward force of 10-20 kg would have been sufficient to cause the weld to fail.  The full penetration 
weld  within  the  bracket  was  only  0.8-1.0 mm  thick  at  best  and  the  supporting  fillet  weld  had  no  fusion  along  one  of  its 
lengths. 

These pictures show the hyperbaric rescue chamber medical lock door assembly and the positioning of the C clamp retaining 
bracket, the second picture clearly indicating a weld feature that failed whilst in operation. 

Medical lock door assembly 

C clamp retaining bracket (after failure) 

The company’s findings were as follows: 

♦  The C clamp retaining bracket was never regarded as being a load bearing or critical component and as such was never 

included in routine checking or inspection of the assembly. 

♦  At the time of installation of the assembly the engineering, certification or inspection regimes were not as stringent as 

they are now. 

♦ 

It is recommended that all load bearing components within a dive spread are thoroughly inspected for signs of corrosion 
or damage. 

 

