AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/13 

Safety Flash 

June 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  High Potential Near Miss: Dropped ROV/TMS Leading to Equipment Damage 

A member has reported an incident in which an ROV/TMS and an A-frame docking head fell to the deck from approximately 
1m.  The incident occurred during the launch of the system; the ROV crew witnessed a guide bar from the A-frame docking 
head fall more than 4m to the deck, landing at the base of the ROV some 2m from an ROV crew member.  The guide bar 
was  heavy-walled  box  section,  approximately  2m  in  length  and  weighed  approximately  20kg.    The  launch  was  stopped 
immediately;  after a further 20-30 seconds, the docking head  separated from the  A-frame, and the ROV/TMS  and docking 
head fell to the deck. 

There  was  significant  damage  to  the  equipment,  and  our  member  considered  that  the  incident  had  the  potential  to  have 
caused a fatality or serious injury to personnel. 

  

   

Figure (L) showing guide bar and (R) guide 

     

Figure: showing stripping out of threads 

 

 

 
 

Our member’s initial investigation of the incident revealed the following: 

♦  The two snubbing damping cylinder rams had stripped out from their clevis threads on the swing frame; 

♦  The welds between the sheave guide posts and the docking head had also separated; 

♦  The initial investigation suggested that the guide post welds had been compromised, allowing movement of the docking 
head out with the design of this system.  This movement eventually transferred through to the damping cylinder clevis 
points, causing stretching of the clevis points over time until they reached a failure point; 

♦  The stresses that led to the guide post weld failures were most likely to have been induced over time by operating the 

A-frame with the damping cylinders in the locked position. 

The following causes were identified, subject to clarification when the fuller investigation is completed: 

♦  Equipment  

♦  Procedures 

-  A review of the clevis design is required to assess their suitability for the loads to which they can be subjected; 

-  The  site-specific  launch  and  recovery  procedure  called  for  putting  the  snubber  ring  in  the  “locked”  position  in 
marginal sea states to prevent excessive swinging of the ROV/TMS, for both launch and recovery.  The manual for 
the type of A-frame involved in this incident makes specific references warning against moving the A-frame with the 
snubbing damping cylinders in the “locked” position; 

-  The  preliminary  investigation  indicates  that  the  stress  on  the  guide  post  welds  is  possibly  a  result  of  the  A-frame 

being operated with the system in the “locked” position over a period of time; 

-  The manual for the type of A-frame involved in this incident contains storage and start up procedures which include 
instructions  to  “inspect  structure  for  inadvertent  damage”  and  “check  condition  of  paintwork  ensuring  there  are  no  bare 
metal surfaces”.  Had these procedures been followed, it is possible that damage to the guide post welds would have 
been spotted before the failure. 

♦ 

Inspection and Maintenance 
- 

Inspection of the weld areas between the sheave guide posts and the docking box suggest that these areas had been 
compromised and possibly separated for some time prior to this incident, and should have been identified already as 
part of routine maintenance on the A-frame. 

Members may also wish to refer to the following IMCA documents: 

IMCA R 011 – The initial and periodic examination, testing and certification of ROV handling systems; 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

2  Failure of Lifting Equipment: Dropped ROV 

A member has reported an incident during offshore lifting operations in which a sling failed, causing an ROV and TMS to drop 
30cm onto deck.  The incident occurred during moving of the ROV and TMS.  The whole assembly, weighing approximately 
8  tonnes,  was  directly  slung  to  the hook  of the  vessel’s  crane  using  a  10  tonne  round  fibre  sling  choked  around  the  main 
lifting eye.  The failure of the sling happened when the load was swung towards its temporary landing spot, after it had been 
lifted from its initial position.  The sling failed suddenly and completely, causing the ROV/TMS assembly to drop from 30 cm 
onto the deck.  There were no injuries, but the frame of the ROV was noticeably damaged.  

 
Figure 1: 10 tonne round fibre sling choked around the main lifting eye 

Figure 2: fibre sling was choked around a sharp edge  

 

 

 
              Figure 3: Damage to ROV frame 

 

               Figure 4: Sling after failure 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The  company’s  own  safety  management  system  was  not  followed  by  the  involved  personnel  (watch-keeping  officer,  

sub-contractor’s staff and crane operator); 

♦  No lift plan was conducted before the start of the operations; 

♦  The on-duty deck foreman was not present on deck to supervise the operations; 

♦  The  adequate  rigging  equipment  and  accessories  (9.7  tonne  four  leg  assembly  and  four  4.75  tonne  bow  shackles) 

required to lift this particular load was not used, and a 10 tonne round fibre sling was used instead; 

♦  The fibre sling was choked around a sharp edge, and no protection or “packing” was placed between the sling and the 

sharp edge.  

operations;   

Our member identified the following preventative actions: 

♦  Remind  all  personnel  onboard  vessels,  including  sub-contractors  and  client  personnel,  to  follow  company  safety 

management system, particularly with respect to lifting operations; 

♦  Ensure  lift  plans  are  undertaken  before  every  lifting  operation,  and  ensure  lift  plan  is  strictly  followed  during  lifting 

♦  Ensure the on-duty deck foreman is always present on deck to supervise any rigging and lifting operations;  

♦  Ensure that only certified and adequate rigging and lifting equipment and accessories are used;  

♦  Ensure that improvised solutions are never used for lifting operations; 

♦  Ensure the rigging and lifting equipment and accessories cannot be damaged by sharp edges, chemicals, hot items etc.; 

♦  Where appropriate, place protection or “packing” between slings and any identified sharp edges;  

♦  Remind personnel that sharp edges do not have to be “razor-sharp” to cause failure of rigging equipment. 

Members may wish to refer to the following IMCA documents, in particular the pocket safety cards which are intended for 
use by vessel crews:  

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA SPP 04 – Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 05 – Lifting equipment 

IMCA SPC 12 – Avoiding dropped objects 

3  Securing of Cargo 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  incorrectly  stowed  cargo 
toppled  over  due  to  the  vessels  motion  on  encountering  unexpected  adverse  weather  conditions.    The  equipment  was 
incorrectly positioned during the outbound load out and not secured.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.14.pdf  

 
4  Generator Fire Incident 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a small fire onboard an offshore vessel.  Excessive smoke and bright 
light were observed coming from a rental generator and the fire alarm was raised.  The vessel fire team were called and they 
were able to suppress the fire within twenty minutes.  

Figure 1: Generator cable caught fire suspected worn wiring over 

time and lay out cables over the terminal 

Figure 2: Phase 2 of the generator bus bar possibly contacting 
the generator casing; thus burning through phase 2 bus bar 

 

 

♦  Our member identified the following immediate causes: 

-  On board the vessel, two of three generators have a protection plate above the output plate, above the HV output 
terminals. This generator did not have that protection plate.  There was evidence that the cable retaining bar was 
rusted and  showing no signs  of ever supporting cables.   This would have  meant that the starter motor  cable was 
lying on top of the HV output terminals; over time this cable may have worn through due to vibration and causing a 
short circuit on phase 2, thus starting the fire; 

-  On examination, the phase 2 bus bar appeared to be touching the generator casing (see Figure 2).  As the bus bar 
burnt, the heat inside the generator caused the cables on the cable retaining bar to fall.  However, the expectation 
was that the cable retaining bar would be blackened and not rusted. 

♦  Our member noted that root cause investigation was on-going, and the following lessons were learnt: 

Proper maintenance and routine check on generators and make sure no wiring laying across the terminal; 

- 
-  All generators should have appropriate protection cover to prevent water getting inside the terminal; 
- 
- 

Fire extinguishers stood by near generators; 
Internal nuts and bolts to be checked, fitted with lock washers as appropriate, and tightened properly. 

5 

Increase in Dropped Object Events   

The Australian National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority (NOPSEMA) has identified a 
concerning increase in dropped object events on mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) in the first quarter of 2013.  Nine 
dropped object notifications have been received by the authority in the first quarter of 2013.   

The  weights  and  heights  of  the  dropped  objects  ranged  from  2  to  2300  kg  and  from  less  than  1  metre  to  43  metres.  
The dropped objects were sections of drill pipe and casing, a spool of wire rope, a navigation light fitting, slip inserts, a hose 
bundle, an equipment handle and a camera located in the derrick.  Three members of the workforce were injured in three 
separate dropped object events.  Two workers each suffered a crush injury to the foot requiring a medical evacuation from 
the facility, while another worker required first aid treatment for a leg injury.  In another case, a member of the workforce 
was standing only 2 metres from where a 28 kilogram object landed having dropped from a height of 19 metres.  

Analysis  using  the  industry  supported  DROPS  Calculator  indicates  that  six  of  these  dropped  object  events  could  have 
resulted in a fatality. 

Further information can be found at www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/alert/Safety-Alert-56-Dropped-objects.pdf  

