AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/16 

Safety Flash 

  May 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

All the incidents here  are related to the  release of stored energy, and/or to  the  failure of equipment, whether 
through corrosion, metal fatigue, or poor design.  

In the first incident, a crewman ‘in the line of fire’ was injured when a wire became taut.  In the second, a crewman 
was injured through unfamiliarity with high pressure jet washing equipment.  The remaining three incidents cover 
equipment failure; two of them involving release of stored pressure.  Corrosion (from dissimilar metals) caused 
failure of fire extinguishers; vibration lead to a condensate leak; and metal fatigue caused a fatal incident when a 
tower crane collapsed. 

1 

First Aid Injury: Person Struck by Wire under Tension 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crew  person  was  struck  by  a  wire  under  tension.  The  incident 
occurred when a rigging crew were preparing to transfer a piece of subsea infrastructure – an inline tee (ILT) - from 
a supply vessel to the installation vessel.  The tagging tower wire was transferred and connected to the ILT on the 
deck of the supply vessel.  At this point the rigging supervisor requested the winch operator to ‘pay-in’ in order to 
take up the slack.  The wire, which had been slack at this point, became taut and struck a person involved in the 
operation.  An “all stop” was called, and the area made safe.  The injured person was sent to see the medic for a 
check-up.  First aid was administered for minor abrasions.  

Figure: Showing worksite after incident 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  Direct causes: 

  uncontrolled movement of wire when it became taut  
 

injured person ‘in the line of fire’; 

  Possible underlying causes:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

lack of concentration or failure to pay attention to the slack of the wire at the critical moment 

injured person was the only person watching the activity 

the task was perceived as preparatory work – there was a lack of personnel/supervision 

the order to stop was received too late.  The winch operator may have been surprised or confused 

the winch was at constant tension – but the tension settings and/or pressure indication were unknown 
until the wire went into tension 

  poor design of the winch panel: the winch hydraulic power unit (HPU) and emergency stop were initially 
next to the operator but had been relocated to make more space.  The emergency stop was on the HPU, 
which was a 10m walk (not in a straight line) away from the control panel in a remote location 

the winch operator used unknown pressure to pay in, then moved the stick to neutral when he received 
the all stop, which applied the brake and locked the tension in the wire 

there was incomplete familiarity and inadequate training for the personnel in the use of this type of winch 
in constant tension mode 

  variations in tension in the wire were created by the relative movements of the two vessels, which were 

connected together by the wire; 

  The following preliminary root causes were identified as: 

lack of attention/concentration, lack of supervision and lack of additional support and organisation 

failure to intervene at the critical moment 

  poor risk perception – the risks in this specific task, with this specific level of crewing, were not identified; 
  poor design of winch control panel and HPU 
 

inadequate training with this winch & HPU operation, leading to a lack of understanding on how to use the 
equipment safely. 

Actions, recommendations, and lessons learnt: 

technical inspection of all the potentially impacted areas 

function test of the winch; 

review and update risk assessment; 

further appropriate training for these particular types of winches to raise awareness; 

  ensure sufficient personnel are available to make any given operation safe; 

 

relocate emergency stop to appropriate location; 

  ensure personnel: 

  ALWAYS intervene when they see an unsafe act or condition 
  ALWAYS perform a UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) toolbox talk and work with a permit or safe system 

of work 

  NEVER perform tasks for which they are not trained and competent. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: winch, wire, tension): 

IMCA SF 07/14 – Incident 5 – Injury caused by movement of wire rope under tension; 

IMCA SF 13/15 – Incident 2 – LTI – rigger struck by rigging under tension. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Members should be aware that IMCA has published a safety promotional DVD called ‘In the line of fire’ which can 
be downloaded or streamed online through the IMCA website.   

See IMCA SEL 036– In the line of fire. 

2 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Serious Hand Injury during High Pressure Washing Operations  

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman was injured during high pressure jet-washing operations. 
The incident occurred during wash down operations inside a ballast tank.  An able seaman (AB) sustained the injury 
as  his  finger  was  accidently  positioned  in  front  of  the  water  jet  nozzle.    The  subsequent  hand  injury  required 
helicopter medivac to an onshore hospital for treatment.  This resulted in a LTI. 

During the operation, a 10cm (short) lance was in use.  The high pressure washer being used at the time delivered 
250 bar of water pressure.  This instantly shredded the AB’s glove, causing a severe cut to a finger on his left hand.  
After localised treatment on-board and contact with shore-side medical doctor, it was decided to send the AB in 
for treatment at the hospital onshore via helicopter. 

Short Lance (used for enclosed 

Two hand grip (as recommended by 

Actual glove used 

 

 

 

spaces) 

manufacturers) 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The AB had been holding the water jet short lance with one hand only; 

  The glove chosen for the job was a simple nitrile glove with no mechanical barrier towards cut resistance; 

  The manufacturer of the short lance recommended two-handed use in their own safety precautions. 

Direct causes to the incident were: 

 

 

Incorrect use of high pressure washer with a short lance; 

Inadequate personal protective equipment (PPE);  

  Risk assessment was insufficient and did not capture the direct risks of using this type of lance; 

  There were no clear written instructions available for using high pressure washer systems. 

Our member drew the following lessons: 

  The strong spray from a pressure washer can cause serious wounds that may first appear minor.  Wounds that 

appear minor can cause a person to delay treatment, increasing risk for infection or disability; 

 

If the stream of water lacerates tissue, there is the risk of cleaning fluids being injected into the soft tissue; 

  This type of operation is commonly seen as a routine task performed on numerous occasions; 

  An increased awareness is required at the risk assessment stage as well as in selection of adequate PPE for the 
task and training/awareness for operators.  Our member held a full review of suitable PPE for the task and a 
review of the company risk assessments for high pressure washing operations. 

 
  This incident could have been avoided with simple measures such as correct use of the tool, adequate PPE and 
appropriate  training  –  as  a  result  our  member  will  implement  formal  training  in  the  use  of  high  pressure 
washers. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: jetting): 

 

IMCA SF 03/15 – Incident 5 – Diver sustains water jetting injury. 

3 

Failure of Fire Extinguishers Owing To Corrosion 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which a fire extinguisher failed due to corrosion of the internal stem. 
The failure was discovered during inspections of fire extinguishers during a mobilisation.  Corrosion had taken place 
where the brass fitting connected to the aluminium stem.  The extinguisher was relatively new and this was its first 
inspection.    On  removal  of  the  pillar  valve,  the  technician  noticed  an  unusual  amount  of  corrosion  around  the 
internal female brass fitting connecting the aluminium stem to the internal male thread of the pillar valve.  The 
technician touched the stem and it fell apart at the corroded area.  The internal inspection of the cylinder found 
that it was in good condition with no signs of corrosion. 

 

 

 

 

Members are reminded of the corrosion potential with dissimilar metals, particularly in the case of pressure vessels. 
Our member notes that had the fire extinguisher been required for use in a hyperbaric chamber all that would have 
happened would have been a release of gas when operated.  Our member is in direct contact with the supplier to 
try and resolve the issue.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: extinguisher): 

 

IMCA  SF 03/07 – Incident 1 – Near miss: hyperbaric fire extinguisher incident; 

 
 

 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 16/15 – Incident 1 – Older "Norfolk range" powder extinguishers from before 2009. 

4  Condensate Leak 

The UK Step Change in Safety has published a ‘safety moment’ regarding a condensate leak.  Whilst there were no 
injuries, this was a high potential incident and some of the issues and recommendations will be of interest to IMCA 
members. 

Before the incident, plant flowrates had changed, and there were high levels of vibration on the pipework on the 
main outlet of the condensate separator.  This vibration caused a crack in the 2’’ line connected to the condensate 
outlet.  Condensate leaked out at around 8 kg/second, and took 90 minutes to stop. 

Issues identified include: 

there was a design failure; 

crew had become accustomed to the vibration; 

there was a lack of specialist competence; 

there was a lack of operations input to projects on valve issues and design. 

Step Change recommendations for learning included: 

  vibrating pipework is a warning sign – don’t ignore it; 

  vibration can result from original design as well as changing plant conditions; 

 

slow or creeping change can be difficult to spot – people can become accustomed to defective conditions;   

  managing vibration requires engineering advice – constraining vibrating pipework can cause failure. 

Step Change found that contributing factors to the incident were: 

 

complacency; 

  poor control of work; 

 

lack of competence. 

Further information, including a useful powerpoint presentation on this incident for use in ‘safety moments’, is 
available for download here. 

5 

Fatalities Caused by Crane Collapse Following Metal Fatigue 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) has published information on a crane hire company that was fined following 
an incident that led to the death of two men as a crane collapsed.   

A worker died after falling from the crane as it collapsed.  The crane fell onto a member of the public, killing him 
also.    Sections  of  the  tower  crane  separated  when  24  bolts  failed  due  to  metal  fatigue.    The  24  bolts  were  a 
significant safety feature on the crane’s slew ring, which connected the mast (tower) to the slew turret.  This allows 
the arms of the crane (jib) to rotate through 360 degrees.  When the bolts failed the slew turret and jib separated 
from the mast and fell to the ground. 

A similar earlier incident, when the bolts failed on the same crane and had to be replaced, had not been investigated 
by  the  crane  company.   The  company  was  found  to  have  an  inadequate  system  to manage  the  inspection  and 
maintenance of their cranes.  Further information can be found here. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incident: 

 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 4 – Near miss: corrosion caused crane boom failure during heavy lifting. 

