AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/14 

Safety Flash 

 June 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Crewman Struck by Dropped Object 

A member has reported a high potential incident in which a crewman was struck by a dropped object. The incident occurred 
when the crewman was ascending a ladder to reach the access/egress of a scaffold platform, and he was struck on his right 
arm by a dropped object. After the object struck the person it fell down under the scaffold platform. The person looked up 
and saw another crewman standing on the scaffold platform receiving a bucket with scaffolding materials from further above. 
The bucket was being lowered on a rope from a windlass room. 

The  crewman  descended  the  ladder  to  investigate  the  object  that  had  struck  him  and  found  that  it  was  a  swivel  coupler 
(scaffold material). He ‘stopped the job’, informed a nearby foreman, and asked other crewmen working in the vicinity of the 
tank  if  they  had  witnessed  the  incident;  unfortunately  no  one  saw  exactly  what  happened,  and  therefore  the  origin  of  the 
dropped  swivel  is  unknown.    The  foreman  made  a  fresh  visual  risk  assessment  of  the  scene  which  included  proper 
housekeeping (swivels stored on the boards next to gate/access) and  discussion of the potential consequences of dropped 
objects.  The  importance  of  using  correct  lifting  equipment  (in  this  case,  soft  scaffolding  lift  sacks)  rather  than  buckets  was 
reinforced.   

The crewman reported to the medic for a medical check-up which revealed no injuries. 

Figure 1: Showing worksite at time of incident 

Figure 2: Swivel coupler 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Illustrating buckets (wrong) and soft-sided sacks (better) for lifting 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The origin of the swivel could have been:  

−  A swivel fell from the bucket 

−  While emptying the bucket a swivel bounced and fell; 

♦  Direct cause: 

−  A swivel laying on the scaffold board fell. (Possibly kicked but unlikely due to kick plate and gate) 

− 

Improper  lifting,  handling  or  storage  -  improper  lifting  equipment  was  used  to  transport  the  scaffolding  materials 
down (buckets attached to approximately 20 metre rope) 

− 

Poor housekeeping - some swivels were left behind next to the access gate near the ladder; 

♦  Root cause:  

− 

− 

Improper  handling  of  materials  -  lowering  scaffold  materials  (approximately  20m)  down  from  height  with  buckets 
attached to a rope 

Improper  storage  of  materials  -  The  temporary  stored  swivel  couplers  were  stored  too  close  to  the  ladder 
access/entrance of the platform. 

 Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident (key words: dropped, bucket)  

♦ 

IMCA SF 11/12 – Incident 2:  Near miss: dropped object. 

Members’ attention is drawn to the following IMCA material which may be of assistance: 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA SPP 04 – Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 05 – Lifting equipment 

IMCA SPC 06 – Working at height 

IMCA SPC 12 – Avoiding dropped objects 

Members may also find useful information from www.dropsonline.com. 

 
2  Unsecured Object Lifted by Helicopter Downwash 

A member has reported an incident in which a bench cover was lifted into the air by the downwash of a helicopter coming 
into land on the nearby helideck. The incident occurred when the vessel received the first crew change helicopter of the day. 
During the final approach of helicopter, the downwash of its rotors caused the cover of the bench to be lifted into the air 
and flung onto the deck some 6m below. The object was 180 cm x  50 cm. There was no-one in the area where the object 
landed.  

Figure 1: The cover of the bench on deck 

Figure 2: The bench without the cover on 

 

 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The bench was recently made onboard; 

♦  The cover of the bench was not secured;  

♦  The Helicopter Landing Officer (HLO) and assistant had both checked the helideck and the area nearby before the first 

helicopter arrived; 

♦  The immediate cause of the incident was failure to secure the object - the cover of the bench was not secured nor 

was a requirement for this identified during inspections; 

♦  The root cause of the incident was: 

− 

Inadequate verification of design – the benches were made for an area affected by downwash during helicopter 
approach over starboard towards the aiming circle of the helideck. The design of the benches failed to include hinges 
or securing aids 

−  Failure  to  identify  hazard  and  risk  –  during  manufacturing,  installation  of  the  benches  and  afterwards  during 

pre-helicopter operation inspections, this hazard and the significant risk it posed, was not identified.  

Our member took the following actions: 

♦  Performed additional inspections to verify if all equipment and materials are properly secured; 

♦  Ensured  that  placement  of  additional/new  equipment  on  or  near  helideck  would  be  properly  risk-assessed  before 

installation. 

There are a large number of safety flashes in which one of the causes of the incident is failure to secure objects, whether at 
height or otherwise, for example:  

♦ 

IMCA SF 10/08 – Incident: Unsecured Object Fell and Injured Crewman. 

IMCA  has  received  no  similar  incidents  involving  any  objects  caught  and  lifted  by  helicopter  downwash.  Keywords  used: 
debris, object, helideck, downwash.  

3  Crewman Suffered First Aid Injury during Cutting Operations 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crewman  cut  his  thigh  whilst  using  a  hand  grinder.  The  incident  occurred 
when he was cutting a 900 mm diameter pipe’s bevel side to make a proper gap between the pipes. While beginning to work 

 
on the pipe, the cutting disc did not enter the cutting point (of the gap) correctly. This made the grinder slip and move away 
from its position and hit the injured person’s right inner thigh. The job was stopped immediately and the injured person was 
sent to the clinic for medical treatment (cleaning and dressing the wound). As per the medical treatment administered by the 
medic, the incident was classified as a First Aid Case. 

Figure 1: Position of the injured person while cutting the bevel’s gap. 

Figure 2: (RECONSTRUCTION) Position of the injured 

Person stands in unstable position where he bent a little bit forward his 

person while the grinder accidentally hit on his right inner 

left leg and his knee totally lean onto the pipe. 

thigh (both hands still hold the grinder) 

 

 

Figure 3: Injured area, right inner thigh 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The  injured  person  was  performing  cutting  activity  standing  on  a  portable  scaffold  platform  that  was  not  adjusted 

properly for the work; 

♦  The scaffold was not suitable for the working height and the distance for the pipe that needed to be cut; 

♦  This inadequate scaffold adjustment forced the injured person to stand in an unstable body position where his left leg 

was bent a little bit forward and the knee totally leaning onto the pipe; 

♦  The injured person had 18 months experience in this function;  

♦  He was wearing the correct PPE; 

♦  The grinder had been inspected before the job and all proper safeguards were found to be correctly fitted and in place;   

 
♦  The incident was witnessed by the foreman at the scene.   

Our member concluded that the immediate and root causes were as follows: 

Immediate cause: improper position for task – the injured person was standing in an unstable position where he 
was bent forward with his left knee leaning fully on the pipe; 

Immediate  cause:  poor  judgement  -  the  injured  person  or his  supervisor  should  have  stopped  the  job  and  made 
sure the portable scaffold was adjusted properly for the work; 

♦  Root cause: inadequate design criteria - the scaffold was not suitable for the working height and the distance for 

the pipe that needed to be cut. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

♦  Further safety discussion and toolbox talks; 

♦  Proper training with the focus topic being that proper position of equipment and personnel is critical to a safe work site; 

♦  Ensure proper working platform to be provided for working at height. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: incorrect, improper, grinder, grinding, injury)   

IMCA SF 03/05 – Incident 11: Grinder incident; 

IMCA SF 06/05 – Incident 1: Hand grinder injuries; 

IMCA SF 05/11 – Incident 2:  Improper use of tooling: bruising. 

4  Cutting Torch Hose Separates from Flame Arrestor 

An incident has come to IMCA’s attention in which an Oxy-Acetylene cutting torch hose separated from the flame arrestor, 
resulting  in  a  flashback.  The  incident  occurred  during  welding  modification  of  stabbing guides  inside  a  pile  driving  hammer. 
While  cutting  a  steel  plate  with  a  torch,  the  pipefitter  experienced  a  flashback  of  flames  as  the  connection  of  the  hose 
suddenly came loose. Immediately the fire watch used the standby fire extinguisher and put out the flames. The men stopped 
the job and called for the supervisor. The pipefitter was unharmed and no property damage occurred. 

Investigation revealed the following: 

♦ 

Immediate cause: was identified as inadequate repair using unsuitable techniques and methods. The inside diameter of 
the  hose  was  larger  than  the  one  suited  for  this  type/size  of  nipple  so  tape  was  used  to  make  up  the  difference.  The 
clamp could not tighten against the barb on the nipple and when the tape warmed up the hose and clamp slipped off over 
the barbed end; 

♦  Root Cause: was use of miss-matched materials that were inadequate for the task. The correct size hoses with clamps 

were ordered but were unavailable at the time. An improvised repair was made using tape to secure a tight fit. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

♦ 

Inspect all torch hoses and remove all with this type of improvised connection; 

♦  Crew trained and provided awareness in proper materials and procedure; 

♦  A ‘Safety Stand Down’ was conducted on-board to reiterate the importance of pre-job inspection and carrying out the 

job using the safest methods and materials. 

Safety  incidents  involving  pressurised  gas  fittings,  Oxy-acetylene  cutting  equipment  and  gas  cutting  in  general  are  quite 
commonplace.  A sample is included here – please refer to the following similar incidents (key words: flame arrestor, flashback, 
incorrect, acetylene), but there may be others.  

IMCA SF 08/01 – Incident 3: Incident involving Oxy-acetylene cutting; 

IMCA SF 09/09 – Incident 1: Poor maintenance and subsequent failure of welding equipment; 

IMCA SF 04/12 – Incident 2: Near miss during subsea cutting operations; 

IMCA SF 07/13 – Incident 1: Failure of gas quad fitting; 

IMCA SF 02/14 – Incident 1: Hose fire caused Hose caused by Flashback in Oxygen & Acetylene Hoses. 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

 
5  Near Miss: Potential Fire Hazard from Halogen Lamp  

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding a near miss incident in which ropes used in the 
pilot ladder were observed in close proximity to a halogen lamp that can create a lot of heat when in use. The ropes were 
promptly moved away from the lamp and stowed in a safe manner. Crew were informed to the potential risk and the proper 
action to take when securing the ropes. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents: (key words halogen, fire, hazard, overheating) 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 3: Near Miss: Exposed Live Electrical Cable; 

IMCA SF 14/11 – Incident 5 Diver helmet hat light [caught fire]. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.14.pdf. 

♦ 

♦ 

 

