SAFETY FLASH 

 December 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 27/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Third-Party High Potential Near Miss – Dropped Gangway 

What happened? 

During barge operations at a spool fabrication yard, a high potential near miss occurred when a gangway positioned 
between  the  quayside  and  barge  fell  2.4m,  landing  on  the  barge.    At  the  time  of  the  incident,  there  were  no 
personnel in the vicinity of the gangway.  However, only minutes earlier, personnel had been using the gangway to 
access the barge. 

Gangway secured at the high end on the quayside using a 

Gangway secured at low end (roller end) using a 

cargo strap (cargo strap in direct contact with abrasion 

cargo strap. 

 

 

point). 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The method used to secure the gangway securing took no account of a tidal range of 7.5m; 

  The position of the cargo straps securing the gangway on the quayside meant that the straps were in direct 

contact with the quayside edge, an abrasion point, at low tide; 

  The task was perceived as ‘routine’; the personnel involved did not identify the potential for the cargo straps 

being exposed to an abrasion point and thus failing; 

  The gangway was designed with a roller on its lower end to enable free movement, but this was incorrectly 

secured, producing tension and failure of the upper securing method; 

 

Inspections of the gangway were conducted; however, they failed to identify the potential for the quayside 
cargo straps to be exposed to abrasion, or that the gangway had been secured at both ends. 

What lessons were learned? 

  A task risk assessment should consider and assess the following: 

 

identification  and  communication  to  all  stakeholders  to  establish  who  is  responsible  for  setting  up, 
monitoring and inspecting gangways 

  expected  tidal  changes  and  potential  vessel  movements  (due  to  sea  state/weather/vessel  traffic  in  the 

vicinity) when setting up and securing gangways 

  appropriate rigging of gangways (gangways which are designed to be free moving are not to be secured at 
the roller end and should have sufficient space to travel and accommodate the tidal range and any barge 
movements) 

 

regular  inspection  of  the  gangway  to  include  free  movement  of  any  rollers,  checking  that  the  securing 
method is free from obstructions and abrasion points. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Guidance On The Transfer Of Personnel To And From Offshore Vessels And Structures (IMCA SEL 025) 

2 

“Don’t forget about gangways and ladders” – USCG: Pilot Dies in Gangway Accident 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published Safety Alert 14-18 regarding a fatal gangway accident.   

Whilst boarding, the gangway separated from the vessel and two individuals fell into the water.  Investigations into 
this incident are still taking place, however it is a reminder that everyday equipment onboard vessels can become 
hazardous when boarding and departing.  

Risks and hazards need to be properly recognised and appropriately mitigated on commercial vessels.  Hazards can 
be presented by: 

  Rotating machinery; 

  Electrical systems; 

  Severe weather or potential fire.  

Mariners  could  become  complacent  in  recognising  hazards,  and  therefore  not  appreciate  the  hazards  that  a 
gangway  could  present.    Some  organisations  have  recognised  the  risk  of  injury  and/or  fatality,  and  have 
appropriately developed gangway safety standards, requirements and best practices to be implemented onboard.  

The USCG have named the following as having put forward requirements and best practices to improve gangway 
safety: 

  Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); 

 

International Maritime Organisation (IMO); 

  Protection and Indemnity Clubs; 

  Owners and Operators 

  Others.  

Due to the above-mentioned fatality, the USCG has strongly recommended: 

 

“Owners and operators, captains and mates review and implement the best practices as presented in the above 
links and comply with all the regulations applicable to your vessel; 

  For vessel pilots, crews, vendors, or anyone boarding or departing a vessel, condition yourself to take a moment 
to examine the gangway, accommodation or pilot ladder.  Look for potential hazards or deficiencies and report 
them to senior personnel onboard the vessel.” 

The USCG notes: never assume that a gangway crossing is ‘routine’ – if there are any concerns regarding the safety 
of a crossing, do not cross – report your concerns.  

The full safety alert can be found on the USCG website.  

3  Crisis Management: Rail Industry High Potential Near Miss 

“Thirty centimetres of safety” 

The UK Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) has published its report into the detrainment of passengers onto 
electrically live track near Peckham Rye station on 7 November 2017. 

What happened? 

A  train  with  450  passengers  on  board  failed  just  outside  a 
railway station during the evening rush hour.  The fault on the 
train had caused the brakes to apply and the driver was unable 
to  release  them.    The  driver  took  advice  over  the  radio  and, 
following this, began to evacuate the passengers to track level.  
This involved passengers climbing down vertical steps to ground 
level, to within 30 centimetres of the live electric conductor rail 
(750 V direct current), and walking along the side of the line for 
about 30 metres to the station.   

Although no-one was hurt in the incident, the close proximity of 
the  energised  conductor  rail  to  the  evacuating  passengers 
posed a significant risk of serious harm. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Causes identified by the RAIB:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

the train driver was given instructions by control room staff who had misunderstood the actual location 
of the stranded train (the control room staff thought the train was actually in the station) 

the train driver and the signaller did not reach a clear understanding about the actions that were required 
to safely detrain the passengers 

the delay caused unrest among the passengers on the train and contributed to stress and task overload of 
the driver, which affected his decision making 

the driver’s experience and skills did not enable him to cope with these demands, and those responsible 
for the track did not effectively implement their own procedures for managing an incident involving a 
stranded train; 

  Underlying factors identified: 

railway management and signalling staff were not adequately prepared to manage the incident 

railway industry standards and procedures relating to stranded trains place little emphasis on the need for 
practical training for those involved. 

What lessons were learned? 

  The importance of following the correct procedures when preparing for incidents and/or emergencies; 

  Ensuring that communications are properly understood; 

  Ensuring that details of incidents are promptly and effectively communicated. 

Although this safety flash incident is not directly related to the offshore industry, the learnings are central to the 
way IMCA members do business, in particular with relation to crisis management, dealing with incidents, and with 
crewing levels, training and competence of staff in a lean market.  

The UK Rail Accident Investigation Branch report can be found here.  

An article on the incident from London transport website www.londonreconnections.com can be found here. 

4  BSEE: Failure of Crane Hydraulic Boom Cylinders 

The US Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has published Safety Alert No. 342, regarding two 
crane failure accidents, identical in incident.  Both accidents occurred during operation on a platform in the Gulf of 
Mexico during 2018.  

Incident 1 

Incident 2 

 

 

In the first incident, a hydraulic boom cylinder recently installed was compromised when the cylinder rod separated 
from the cylinder rod eye.  This caused the cylinder to drop to the deck below.  As there were two cylinders on the 
crane, the failure did not cause the boom to collapse.  

In the second incident, a replacement for the above-mentioned failed cylinder suffered the exact same failure.  In 
this second instance, the replacement cylinder fell and hit a handrail.  

Both  failed  cylinders  and  the  remaining  attached  cylinder  were  sent  to  a  hydraulics/cylinder  specialist  for 
inspection.  The specialist found the following: 

 

In the cylinders that failed, the pin-to-pin lengths were different – this was due to different rod lengths;  

  The  difference  in  rod  lengths  meant  that  when  the  cylinders  were  working  in  tandem,  the  shorter  length 

cylinders experienced stress at the rod pin coupling; 

  The stress, alongside an inferior weld, resulted on a failure of the rod pin coupling and rod connection.  This 

failure led the rod to separate from the rod pin coupling, causing the cylinder to fail. 

BSEE recommended that operators consider the following in the future: 

  Ensure equivalent eye-to-eye rod length of hydraulic boom cylinders, when repair of one is necessary; 

  Review crane cylinder configurations;  

  Make  the  original  equipment  manufacturer  aware  of  the  failures  (regardless  of  the  manufacturer)  –  BSEE 
recommends that operators obtain any replacement hydraulic boom cylinders from the original equipment 
manufacturer, or a certified manufacturer.   

The full safety alert can be viewed on the BSEE website.  

5  Pipelay Technician Sustained Cut to Wrist Whilst Handling Testing Equipment 

What happened? 

During pipelay operations, two non-destructive testing (NDT) technicians were handling a ‘scanner belt’, which is 
used  to  connect  the  automated  ultrasonic  testing  (AUT)  scanner  to  the  pipe  for  testing  pipeline  welds.    On 
completion of weld testing, the scanner belt (approx. 10kg) was released by one of the technicians, and it ‘slipped 

off’ the pipe and made contact with the other technician’s wrist.  This resulted in a laceration which required 8 
stitches.  The injured person was wearing full  personal protective equipment (PPE).  However, the scanner belt 
made contact with his wrist which was exposed through the gap between the coverall-sleeve and glove. 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The equipment design did not account for sharp edges and potential risks during manual handling; 

  Personnel involved in the task did not identify the potential for exposure to sharp edges on equipment, and 

had perceived the task as ‘routine’; 

  The injured person did not have clear communication or eye contact with the other technician who released 
the  scanner  belt.    It  was  also  found  that  language  barriers  between  the  technicians  contributed  to  poor 
communication; 

  The  injured  person’s  coverall  sleeve  had  ‘crept  up’  when  his  arms  were  reached  out,  exposing  his  wrist  to 

contact with equipment. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Review of  tasks  that  involve  repetitive  manual  handling  of  equipment,  to ensure  that  potential  sharp-edge 

hazards are identified and appropriately controlled; 

  Communicate  safe  manual  handling  techniques  for  tasks  that  involve  more  than  one  person  dealing  with 

equipment at the same time.  This should include focus on good communications to prevent loss of control; 

  Review of similar tasks and associated PPE controls, to identify potential exposure to forearms or wrists, when 

arms extending outwards or upwards.  Consider use of cut proof arm protection, as shown in images above; 

  Reinforce the need for the continual review of controls associated with ‘routine’ tasks, during  toolbox talks 

(TBT) and hazard inspections. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Crewman suffers cut to hand – but gloves prevented it being much worse 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): finger injury whilst working in engine room 

  Worker sustained severe facial injuries during vessel maintenance 

