AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/09 

Safety Flash 

October 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Trapped Diver Umbilical Incident Resulting in Diver Fatality 

A member has reported an incident where a trapped diver umbilical resulted in his death.  During the surface supplied diver 
operation, the diver was deployed to the bottom (56m) to locate fixing points for davits which required him to travel along 
the pipeline and for the barge to be moved into position. 

During the diving operation the barge moved astern.  It is thought that this movement caused the diver’s umbilical to become 
snagged on an object on the seabed cutting off his gas supply.  On the diver’s umbilical there were two ‘D’ rings – one at 39m 
(~130’) and one at 50m (165’).  The 50m ‘D’ ring was attached to the bell lift wire controlling the maximum excursion of the 
diver; it was the 39m ‘D’ ring that became snagged on the seabed.  The diver went on to bail out, reported that his umbilical 
was fouled and made his way back to the wet bell where he appeared to have been attempting to put the bell pneumo tube 
into his helmet when he was found by the standby diver  who had been deployed from the surface.  Both video and audio 
communications were lost soon after the diver reported his umbilical was fouled.  Soon after the standby diver arrived at the 
wet bell attempts were made to recover it and the divers to the surface.  As the wet bell was being recovered, since the 
diver’s umbilical was fouled on the seabed, he was dragged out of the wet bell.  This occurred twice before the standby diver 
freed the trapped umbilical and eventually the diver was recovered to the surface but was pronounced dead by the doctor 
on board the vessel. 

Following the investigation of the incident, a number of actions were put in place by the company: 

♦  Controlled barge movements while divers are on excursion umbilical and travelling along a pipeline; 
♦  All divers to be tended in-water, i.e. two divers in the water with one diver tending from the wet bell; 
♦  All divers to be briefed on all emergency dive operational procedures and re-familiarised with the wet bell emergency 

equipment; 

♦  Thorough briefing to all divers on the emergency recovery procedures to recover a stricken diver; ensuring that always 
his umbilical is cleared of any fouling which may have occurred during the dive and recover all the umbilical slack back to 
the surface prior to the wet bell ascending; 

♦  Use of a pre-dive survey by a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) to be carried out to check debris in the work location 

♦  Ensure that both video/communications for all divers involved in a dive are connected and working as part of the pre-

involving divers travelling up pipelines; 

dive checks; 

♦  Ensure  divers  deploy  their  excursion  umbilical  in  a  safe  manner  from  the  bell,  ensuring  that  it  is  clear  of  the 
counterweight or any foreign objects which may be in the area of the bell footprint where the deployed umbilical would 
lie. 

Members’ attention is also drawn to the following IMCA guidelines: 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA D 014 Rev. 1 – IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving – which sets out good practice guidance on all 
aspects of a diving operation including work planning, risk management including vessel movements and emergency and 
contingency plans. 

IMCA  D  030  Rev.  1  –  Surface  supplied  mixed  gas  diving  operations  –  which  sets  out  that  a  properly  equipped  wet  bell 
(providing a gas bubble in the wet bell dome) is required for this type of operation; aspects which should be considered 
in  the  risk  assessment  including  umbilical  management  and  the  recovery  of  an  injured  diver;  that  the  dives  for  depths 
between 50m and 75m the bottom time should limited to a maximum of 30 minutes; that for dives greater than 50m the 
standby diver should be located in and tend the diver from the wet bell. 

IMCA D 037 – DESIGN for surface supplied mixed gas diving systems – which sets out the equipment requirements for this 
type of diving operation. 

 

2  Lost Time Injury: Gangway Deployment 

A member has reported an incident in which a person suffered a broken leg during gangway deployment.  Prior to arrival at 
the  quayside,  a  vessel’s  double  sectioned  gangway  (see  Figure  1)  was  lowered  and  extended,  in  readiness  for  use,  in 
accordance with onboard procedures. 

Approaching  the  quayside,  the  bridge  was  informed  that  berthing  plans  for  the  vessel  had  changed.    The  change  of  berth 
required  the  use  of  a  different  gangway  and  the  bosun  was  instructed  to  recover  the  now  partly  deployed  gangway.    The 
bosun and an able seaman (AB) started work on this task but failed to follow established procedures. 

The recovery procedure required the gangway to be initially lowered to allow tension to come off the lifting wires and at the 
same  time  allow  the  securing  pins  to  be  removed  for  stowing,  before  then  raising  the  gangway  back  up  to  the  stowed 
position.  

However, the bosun and the AB started to remove the securing pins without first lowering the gangway to take the tension 
off the lifting wires. The AB removed the inboard pin as this was not under tension and therefore easily removed by hand.  
The outboard pin was stiff because of the tension on the lifting wires.  A crowbar was used to exert pressure on the lower 
section of the gangway, to allow the outboard pin to be removed.  During this process, both the bosun and the AB were 
standing within the steps of the gangway, as shown in Figure 2. 

Top extension part: when outboard pin 
jumped out this section slid up quickly and 
trapped the bosun and able seaman 
 

 

 

Bosun and able seaman were standing 
here when attempting to remove the 
outboard pin 
 

Figure 1 – Double (upper and lower) sectioned gangway 

Figure 2 – Area of entrapment 

The  expectation  was  that  the  pressure  applied  by  the  crowbar  to  the  lower  section  of  the  gangway  would  loosen  the 
outboard  pin,  which  could  then  be  removed  by  hand.    Instead,  the  outboard  pin,  with  the  pressure  released,  jumped  out.  
Because  there  was  still  tension  on  the  lifting  wires  at  the  lower  end  of  the  gangway,  the  lower  extension  section  of  the 
gangway slid quickly upwards, trapping both the bosun and the AB by the legs. 

Urgent  assistance  was  requested  and  both  men  were  subsequently  released  by  using  a  lever  hoist  to  relieve  the pressure.  
During subsequent medical attention it was discovered that one of the workers had a serious fracture of the leg.  He was 
taken to hospital ashore. 

This extremely serious incident could have been avoided entirely by following the correct procedures. 

3  Helicopter Task Group Update: Briefing on S-92 Helicopter Fleet 

The Helicopter Task Group has published the attached briefing concerning Sikorsky S-92 helicopters. 

 

4 

Importance of Inspecting Fall Protection Equipment 

IMCA  has  been  made  aware  of  a  number  of  examples  of  fall  protection  equipment  failing  owing  to  poor  or  sub-standard 
equipment: 

♦  Safety  Alert  09-17  –  Near  Miss  –  New  Fall  Protection  Equipment  Failure  –  published  by  the  International  Association  of 
Drilling Contractors (IADC) (attached), notes that a new ‘pass-through tie-off adapter’ was only hot-glued and did not 
have the required stitching. 

♦  Whilst teaching a fall protection class an instructor found a new piece of fall protection equipment that was not properly 
sewn.  This equipment was brand new, still in the bag and made by a reliable manufacturer.  One of the lanyards was 
improperly sewn and the webbing could be pulled apart by hand. 

Improperly sewn fall protection equipment 

 

♦ 

In another similar instance, it was discovered that the rivet from the secondary lock on the snap hook of a lanyard had 
become  damaged  and  allowed  the  secondary  lock  to  come  free  from  the  hook.    The  hook  was  not  involved  in  a  fall 
event. 

Members  are  encouraged  to  re-emphasise  to  their  personnel  the  importance  of  thorough  inspection  of  all  fall  protection 
equipment before and after use. 

Helicopter Task Group update 
Briefing on S-92 helicopter fleet 

 

13 October 2009 

 

 

 
Last  week  Sikorsky,  the  manufacturer  of  the  S-92  helicopter,  issued  a  letter  to  all  helicopter 
operators concerning some occurrences of cracking which had been detected in one of the four 
feet which mount the S-92 Main Gearbox (MGB) to the aircraft.  

The  helicopter  operators  and  the  task  group  have  now  understandably  received  a  number  of  questions  from 
passengers concerning this matter. In the Q&A briefing below, we will provide as much information as possible 
on the current situation with the S-92 fleet. 

1.  Is there a link between the S-92 accident in Newfoundland and the cracking now detected in the 
S-92 gearbox feet? 

No, there is no link between the Newfoundland accident and the cracking now detected in the gearbox feet. 

2.  Are these cracks in the same area of the gearbox as was modified following the accident in 
Canada?  

No. The earlier modification replaced titanium studs on the Oil Filter Housing with steel items; that modification 
is not connected to this issue.   

3.  Will the winter weather have any impact on the reliability of the S-92 and is any additional 
maintenance required? 

No.  The  aircraft’s  flight  manual  sets  out  the  conditions  in  which  the  S-92  can  fly.  Helicopter  operators always 
operate  within  these  criteria.  The  manufacturer’s  maintenance  procedures  are  already  designed  to  cater  for 
differences in the climate that the helicopter may encounter in a particular role.    

4.  Is vibration causing the issue with the MGB feet and do other helicopter types have the same 
problem? 

Sikorsky  does  not  believe  that  vibration  felt  in  the  cabin  is  a  contributor  in  any  way  to  the  loads  on  the 
transmission feet.  They have conducted actual flight tests with instrumentation (strain gauges) on the feet and 
know that the loads in the foot are primarily the result of the lifting and torque loads of the main rotor.  

5.  How did Sikorsky decide upon a 10 hour inspection regime? 

Sikorsky develops inspections of this type by testing and analysing the structure and determining the amount of 
time  it  would  take  for  a  crack  to  occur  and  grow.  They  then  apply  very
  conservative  reductions  to  set  the 
inspection  interval  so  that  it  is  effective  at  finding  a  problem  with  plenty  of  margin  and  would  even  account 
should  it  be  missed  during  any  particular inspection.  This  process  was  used  by  Sikorsky  to  determine the  10-
hour  interval  specified  in  the  Service  Bulletin.  In  addition,  Sikorsky  showed  during  certification  that  the 
attachment of the gearbox to the airframe is secure for a period of time even if one of the 4 feet is completely 
severed from the gearbox. 

6.  If a bolt fails, could it collide with the main or tail rotor? 

A  small  number of  bolts  have  been  found  broken over  the last  few  years  and this  is the  reason  that they  are 
now replaced every 500 hours for good measure.  To Sikorsky’s knowledge in all of these cases the bolt head 
stayed in place in its hole. One reason is that the bolt is caulked after installation to prevent water ingress, and 
this  caulking  would  hold  any  broken  piece  in  place.  In  addition,  the  area  in  which  the  bolts  are  located  is 
enclosed from the outside environment under the crowling areas and so contact with the main blades or the tail 
rotor would effectively be impossible.  

7.  How are the cracks detected? 

The  gearbox  feet  are  inspected  every  10  flight  hours  in  accordance  with  ASB92-63-020.  Cracks  are  first 
identified visually and then confirmed through Non-Destructive Testing (NDT). This technique reveals flaws and 
defects in a material or device without damaging or destroying the test sample.  

8.  Does the 10 hours inspection include an NDT check? 

The 10-hour check includes the use of NDT procedures if a crack is believed to exist through visual inspection.   

9.  Would reducing the number of take offs and landings help to prevent the cracking? 

Sikorsky  is  conducting  a  thorough  technical  investigation  now  and  as  soon  as  they  have  reached  conclusions 
that  information  will  be  made  available;  at  this  time  there  is  no  Sikorsky-recommended  restriction  on  the 
number of take offs or landings that can be conducted on a particular flight. This is based on their analysis and 
testing.   

10.  Would reducing the payload help to prevent the cracking? 

Sikorsky  is  conducting  a  thorough  technical  investigation  now  and  as  soon  as  they  have  reached  conclusions 
that information will be made available; at this time there is no payload restriction in place.   

The inspection procedures introduced through Sikorsky's Alert Service Bulletin, and in place with all helicopter 
operators, will identify and anomalies in the unlikely event that they appear. 

11.  The S-92 door vibrates in flight. Could this be contributing to the cracks? 

Sikorsky  is  conducting  a  thorough  technical  investigation  now  and  as  soon  as  they  have  reached  conclusions 
that  information  will  be  made  available;  it  is  very
  unlikely  that  any  vibration  in  the  door  assembly  is  a 
contributory factor to this phenomena. See also the response to question 4.    

12.  Could the relative inexperience of the flight crews with the S-92 be a contributing factor?  

No,  not  at  all.  The  crews  are  all  fully  qualified  to  operate  the  aircraft  and  their  continuous  training  regime 
ensures  that  standards  are  monitored  at  very  regular  intervals.  In  addition,  the  aircraft  has  a  system  called 
HUMS (Health Utilisation & Monitoring System) which monitors a wide range of aircraft parameters and warns if 
the aircraft is operated outside of design limitations.    

13.  Are the S-92s in Norway and other regions experiencing similar problems and do they fly 
similar flight patterns? 

Yes, and the update letter recently issued by Sikorsky went to all operators world-wide.  

14.  Can safety reps be invited to see the actual failed equipment/ components and can they have 
pictures or presentation of what the failure looks like? 

Sikorsky will provide photographs of the broken foot from their Materials Laboratory some time next week.  

15.  Could pilots and engineers come offshore to reassure the population? Where can passengers 
get further information? 

All  helicopter  operators  will  work  closely  with  their  clients'  aviation  departments  to  ensure  that  the  fullest 
information  is  available  for  briefing  passengers  travelling  offshore  in  whatever  form  that  has  to  take. 
Passengers  that  have  concerns  which  could  not  be  answered  by  this  briefing  should  contact  their  employer's 
aviation  / logistics  department  in  the  first  instance.  If  questions  remain  after  this,  passengers  can  send  an  e-
mail  directly  to  the  Helicopter  Task  Group  which  will  seek  to  provide  an  answer  as  soon  as  possible. 
helitaskgroup@oilandgasuk.co.uk 

 

If you would like to find out more about any of the issues outlined above, please contact the 
helicopter task group on helitaskgroup@oilandgasuk.co.uk  

© 2009 United Kingdom Offshore Oil and Gas Industry Association Limited trading as Oil & Gas UK 
London: Tel 020 7802 2400  Fax 020 7802 2401     
Aberdeen: Tel 01224 577 250  Fax 01224 577 251 
Email info@oilandgasuk.co.uk  Website http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk  

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 17 
 

NEAR MISS—NEW FALL PROTECTION EQUIPMENT FAILURE 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  derrickman  was working  in  the  derrick  and was  using  a NEW “Pass  through  Tie-Off  Adapter”  for  his  fall 
protection  anchor  point.    The  tie-off  adapter  in  this  case  was  a  3”  web  sling,  2  feet  long.    The  adapter  is 
wrapped  around  a  beam  or  other  secure  tie-off  point  and  one  end  passes  through  the  other  “choking”  the 
anchor point.  The lanyard is then attached to a full body harness d-ring.   

The derrickman had tied-off and then leaned out to perform his work.  The tie-off adapter “broke”, however, 
the derrickman was able to catch hold of the pipe to keep from falling out of the derrick.  

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Inspection of the tie-off adapter revealed that the D-ring end of the sling had not been fully assembled.  The 
webbing material end had been folded around the D-ring and hot glued, but had not been stitched.  Follow-
up inspections revealed that four out of the five tie-off adapters the company had purchased were defective.   

 
Several opportunities were missed to catch this mistake:  

1)  The manufacturer failed to catch the defect during its quality control inspections;  
2)  The  supplier  receiving  the  slings  from  the  manufacturer  also  failed  to  inspect  them  before  selling 

3)  The receiving agent didn’t inspect upon receiving them;  
4)  The Safety Advisor distributed the defective slings to the rig without inspecting them;  
5)  The Rig Manager stored the slings in his office until needed and failed to inspect them before 

them;  

use;  

6)  The Derrickman, which was the last chance to catch the error, began using the fall protection 

7) 

equipment without first inspecting it. 
Inspections  did  not  happen  because  personnel  involved  accepted  that  new  equipment  was  in 
good condition without defects.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The company emphasized to all rig personnel that they must be the final check of all safety equipment.  The 
extra minute or two you spend inspecting equipment before using it (new or used), may save you or a co-
worker from serious harm.   

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2008 

