AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/06 

August 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Lifting Wire Strop Failure During Air Bag Lift 

A member has reported the following incident, which occurred during a diving operation from a DP diving support vessel.  
The diver was asked to inflate a 5 tonne air lift bag, which had swaged half inch wire strop passing through the 12 o’clock bolt 
hole position on tie-in flanges.  The lift bag was being used to lift and align flanges in position prior to bolt installation.  While 
filling the lift bag, the diver was asked by the diving supervisor to double-check the attached rigging.  The diver reported a 
sharp  bend  on  the  wire  strop  through  the  12  o’clock  bolt  hole  of  the  flange  end  which  went  up  to  the  lift  bag.    As  a 
precaution, the supervisor instructed the diver to stop inflating the airbag, to deflate and remove the airline.   

While he was undoing the airline, which was made cold, the wire strop parted, causing the lift bag and airline to come to the 
surface around 20 metres from port side of the vessel.  The diver was on a clear path to the bell with his umbilical and was 
far away from the air bag rigging attachment, thus averting possible entanglement.  The company notes that this avoided what 
could potentially have been a fatality.  The diver was reported well after the incident. 

Inverter ripped out from this location 

 

 

End of strop cut on flange face 

On inspection of the air lift bag, it was found that the inverter line attached to the top of the bag had pulled out, resulting in 
the lift bag failing to spill the air contained and the bag reaching the surface.  The diver reported that the bag was only half to 
two-thirds full in capacity at the time of the incident. 

Safety Flash 

 

The company identified the following contributory factors: 

  The less-than half inch wire rope strop passing through the flanges and attached to the air lift bag had not been certified; 

  The inverter line pulled out of the top tab (the tab burst) and thus the air bag could not be inverted; 

  The suitability of the rigging had not been thoroughly checked prior to lowering the air bags to the seabed. 

The following points were identified as helping avoid an even more serious incident: 

  Timely observation by the supervisor and his instruction to the diver to check the rigging while inflating the lift bag; 

  The  diver  and  his  umbilical  were  out  of  the  ascent  path  of  the  air  lift  bag,  thus  avoiding  what  could  potentially  have 

become a fatality. 

and OCM; 

proper lifting procedures; 

The company has taken the following corrective measures following the incident: 

  The incident was  discussed in toolbox meetings  and  the  potential  effects  were discussed  by the  diving  superintendent 

  The dive team has been reminded of the importance of checking all rigging prior to attachment to loads and of following 

  The rigging gear onboard the vessel has been inspected both for any damage and to ensure it is properly certified; 

  The air bag supplier is further investigating the incident. 

The company has issued a reminder that lifting incidents, including air bag lifting, carry the potential for serious injuries and 
fatalities  to  occur,  reiterating  the  need  to  follow  proper  procedures,  to  review  lifts  at  toolbox  meetings  before  they 
commence and to keep abreast of company and industry guidance on the subject. 

