AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/09 

Safety Flash 

November 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Unexpected Lowering of a Suspended Load 

A member has reported an incident in which there was an unexpected lowering of a suspended load during a lifting operation 
which had the potential to cause significant injury.  During maintenance of an ROV winch system, a yoke was being supported 
in position by a shore crane to allow a specific task to be conducted. 

The shore-side crane was provided by the port authority which had sub-contracted it in, along with a rigging team from the 
port authority.  As the end of the working day approached, the crane operator sounded the crane horn to indicate that time 
was  running  out.    The  vessel  team  agreed  with  the  banksman  that  all  persons  would  work  for  an  extra  thirty  minutes  to 
complete  the  task.    However,  this  agreement  was  not  communicated  to  the  crane  driver.    Five  minutes  later  the  crane 
operator  sounded  the  horn  again  as  he  wished  to  lower  the  load.    The  vessel  team  and  banksman  gave  little 
acknowledgement to this.  Shortly after this the crane operator lowered the load and shut down the crane as his working 
day was over. 

At this time someone was threading a turnbuckle into the yoke.  Due to the weight of the yoke this came out of his grasp 
prior to the yoke landing and his hands came clear.  There were no injuries. 

Turnbuckles of outboard 
yoke arms were being 
reassembled at the time of 
the incident 
 
 

Yoke connects to both 
sheaves; outboard yoke 
arms were being supported 
by quay crane 
 

Site of yoke being supported by shore-side crane 

 

♦  The crane operator was under the impression that everyone understood his signalling and thought that all persons were 

Investigation of the incident revealed the following: 

clear from the work site; 

♦  The crane operator could not see the work site; 

♦  There  was  no  verbal  or  radio  communication  with  the  crane  driver  either  before  (at  the  toolbox  talk)  or  during  the 

operation; 

♦  There  was  no  lift  plan  in  place  for  this  task,  which  meant  guidance,  roles  and  responsibilities  were  not  well  defined.  

Internal company procedures for lifting were not followed; 

 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦  The  banksman  had  no  authority  from  a  working  hierarchy  over  the  crane  operator  to  agree  that  he  should  work  an 
extra thirty minutes.  The working hierarchy also created poor team dynamics, as the crane operator was left out of all 
communications and decisions; 

♦  A string of errors through poor communication almost resulted in a serious injury to personnel working on the winch. 

The following actions were suggested: 

for lifting operations; 

♦  Teams conducting lifting operations should ensure that they are familiar with and follow their own company procedures 

♦  All lifts should have a lift plan – teams involved in lifting are to ensure that lift plans are in place prior to the lift starting; 

♦  All persons involved in lifts should be included in the toolbox talk prior to the start of operations; 

♦  Third-party  contractors  involved  in  members’  operations,  particularly  lifting  operations,  should  be  fully  briefed 

beforehand and personnel should be fully aware of the required level of subcontractor supervision; 

IMCA guidelines covering this type of operation are as follows: 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA M 175 – Operational communications: Part 1 – Bridge and dive control 

IMCA SEL 020/M 193 – Guidance on operational communications: Part 2 – Lifting operations. 

2  Near Miss: Loss of a Small Crane (‘Cherry Picker’) Wire 

A member has reported an incident in which a crane winch wire was lost during light subsea lifting work.  The winch wire 
and the load dropped on to the seabed near to working divers. 

A small crane, sometimes referred to offshore as a ‘cherry picker’, was being used to deploy a small tool basket to a diver 
working on a subsea manifold.  It had been identified on  the previous shift there was insufficient wire on the crane winch 
drum to reach the seabed; however there was sufficient winch wire to reach the roof of the manifold. The deck crew and 
dive supervisors had been briefed by the previous shift regarding the short length of wire. 

During the operation to deploy the basket the deck crew was instructed to deploy the tool basket to the ‘short mark’ (rope 
marks fitted to the cherry picker wire).  The diver spotted the tool basket and gave an ‘all stop’ signal.  However, the tool 
basket  continued  to  descend  towards  the  seabed  followed  by  the  entire  length  of  the  winch  wire  which  landed  in  close 
proximity to the divers.  The divers were uninjured and returned unaided to the bell. 

An investigation took place which, in addition to errors in lift planning, suitability of equipment and management of change, 
revealed the following: 

♦  The divers were working directly under a suspended load; 

♦  There were several ‘short marks’ identified on the winch wire; 

♦  The pilot of the observing remotely operated vehicle (ROV) had not been instructed to watch the descending load; 

♦  The ‘lineout meter’ giving details of how much winch wire had paid out was defective; 

♦  A hydroacoustic position reference (HPR) beacon had not been fitted to the wire in order to confirm the depth. 

The company involved implemented a number of control measures following this incident: 

♦  A  ‘dropped  object  cone’  protection  procedure  was  implemented  for  divers  where  the  diver(s)  must  be  outside  a 
minimum 30 degree dropped object cone for all subsea lifts; if this is not practical then they must at least retire under 
the bell.  Certain loads being deployed and recovered will require the bell to be recovered. 

♦  At least two independent depth reference devices should be in operation when deploying loads subsea.  These can be: 

a line out meter 
an HPR transponder 
rope marks 

– 
– 
– 
–  ROV observation should be regarded as secondary means of reference; 

♦  The crane or ‘cherry picker’ operator should have suitable visual references to allow an accurate understanding of the 

position of the subsea load and the capabilities of the lifting equipment. 

 

3  Hand Injury: Injection of Hydraulic Fluid 

IMCA has received information about a hand injury caused by leaking pressurised hydraulic fluid on a drilling rig.  A person 
was searching for the source of a small hydraulic leak.  The leak was located and a request made for the hydraulic pump to 
be shut down so that the damaged hose could be replaced.  The pump was duly shut down.  Then the person involved placed 
his index finger (whilst wearing double gloves) over the damaged spot on the hose so as not to lose the location of the leak. 

The person involved was unaware that hydraulic pressure remained on the system following shut down of the pump and that 
this pressure had actually increased for around two seconds after the pump shut down (owing to back pressure).  Hydraulic 
fluid burst through the damaged spot on the hose and was injected through the double gloves into the person’s index finger.  
Surgery was required to find and remove the injected oil from the finger and hand of the person.  

This incident serves as a timely reminder to maintain vigilance and awareness of the very serious potential hazards and risks 
associated with working with pressurised hydraulic fluid. 

Damaged spot on hydraulic hose 

Major surgery was required to track and remove the injected 

 

 

hydraulic oil from the person’s hand 

4  Tumble Dryer Fire Onboard a Vessel 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a small fire inside the drum of a tumble dryer on a vessel offshore.  
A burning smell was detected on the bridge of the vessel concerned and an investigation into the source was commenced.  
It was traced to the laundry where a small fire in the drum of a tumble dryer was observed.  The fire was extinguished and 
the dryer contents removed and doused to cool. 

Investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The dryer had been filled with galley towels by a steward, who then started the drier on a ‘normal +’ temperature cycle 

and left the laundry to carry out other duties; 

♦  Despite established operating procedures, the steward did not return to the laundry on completion of the cycle and it 

was around two hours later that the fire was detected; 

♦  The towels were not the specific colour coded cleaning cloths designated to wipe down the galley surfaces but rather 

oven towels and dish towels; 

♦  The  towels  placed  in  the  dryer  appear  to  have  become  contaminated  with  oils  or  fats  which,  after  being  through  the 
drying cycle and then remaining in the drum for  around  an hour, allowed the heat to  build up and  led to the start of 
spontaneous combustion of the towels; 

♦  The steward demonstrated lack of awareness of the established procedure for laundering galley towels/cloths and failed 

to realise the consequences of his actions; 

♦  The  third-party  catering  contractor  had  procedures  for  operating  the  tumble  dryers  but  these  had  not  been  put  into 

practice on the vessel, nor were the catering team fully aware of these procedures; 

 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦  Control measures and lessons learnt from a previous tumble dryer fire on the same vessel had not been retained owing 

to changes in catering personnel. 

The following actions were taken: 

♦  Vessel  management  should  ensure  that  policy  and  procedures  for  laundry  operations,  particularly  with  regard  to  the 

drying of galley cloths, are fully understood by all catering personnel; 

♦  Adequate and clear instructions for the operation of the laundry and any specific instructions such as for galley cloths, 

payloads and temperatures should be posted in the laundry. 

5  Bell Bottom Door Hydraulic Operating System Failure 

A member has reported the failure of a bell bottom door hydraulic operating system.  The failure occurred while carrying 
out standard bell recovery operations using the port dive bell on a twin bell system. 

While  attempting  to  close  the  dive  bell  bottom  door,  it  was  noted  that  the  bottom  door  did  not  fully  close  and  that  the 
bottom door had castellated.  Further attempts were made to close the door fully which exacerbated the situation, resulting 
in the bottom hatch being jammed more solidly. 

The divers carried out an internal dive bell inspection and found that the hydraulic control system had failed due to hydraulic 
system oil loss. 

Several unsuccessful attempts to rotate the bottom door were made including topping up the hydraulic oil system tank and 
also removing sections of the internal hydraulic operating pipework in an attempt to rotate the bottom hatch manually. 

The bottom door was found to have jammed to such  an  extent that the divers were  unable to produce sufficient torque, 
using the manual tools available in the dive bell, to turn it. 

The  decision  was  made  to  launch  the  starboard  dive  bell  and  effect  diver  recovery  using  the  member’s  ‘through  water 
transfer’ procedure to the starboard bell which went without incident with all divers successfully returned to the system. 

The cause of the failure was found to be a ferrule which had become detached from a hydraulic pipe in the control system, 
rendering the bottom door hydraulic system inoperable. 

The  member  noted  that  the individual  operations  of  opening/closing  and  rotation  of  the  bottom  door  were  controlled  by 
directional  control  valves  (DCVs)  and  that  both  valves  could  be  operated  simultaneously,  so  that  in  essence  both 
opening/closing and rotation could be carried out at the same time. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

♦  visual system designed inside the dive bell to show that castellations are in line, to allow for better control by the diver; 

interlock between directional control valves fitted; 

♦  procedure for operating bottom hatch posted locally in bell and in dive control; 

familiarisation, training and exercises improved for dive bell bottom door operation; 

technical description and emergency procedures prepared and posted in dive bell and dive control; 

failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) reviewed with regard to bottom hatch operation; 

♦  maintenance plan reviewed. 

 

                  Pump handle                     Gauge         Hydraulic reservoir 

 

Check plate 

Direction control valves (DCVs) to 

select raiser/lower or rotate 

 

 

Actual ferrule and nut from the bell 

 

6  Near Miss: ROV Fuse Bolt Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which a crew member was narrowly missed by the head of a fuse bolt which had been 
shot out of a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) manipulator arm at high speed.  It occurred as normal pre-dive checks were 
being completed on the ROV.  The manipulator arm being tested was cycled and, during the test, the fuse bolt securing the 
jaws of the manipulator failed.  This caused the head of the bolt to shoot out of the manipulator arm at high speed.  The head 
of the bolt passed close to an ROV technician who could have been severely injured had it hit him.  There were no injuries. 

The  manufacturer’s  operating  procedures  recommend  that  personnel  stay  clear  of  the  operational  envelope  of  the 
manipulator  during  functional  testing  on  deck.    However,  owing  to  the  high  levels  of  kinetic  energy  shown  in  this  failure, 
additional  caution  should  be  exercised,  for  example,  standing  further  back,  cordoning  off  the  area  and  ensuring  that  non-
essential personnel are clear. 

Further investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The fuse bolt had failed under water during the previous dive; 

♦  The manipulator had been exposed to heavy work during the previous dive and this had led to other components in the 

arm and wrist assembly being damaged sufficiently to lead to this second fuse bolt failure on deck. 

 

The following actions were taken: 

♦  The ejected fuse bolt was recovered and the manipulator and ROV made ready for dive; 

♦  Additional controls were identified which would prevent a recurrence of this type of incident; 

♦  CCTV footage of the failure was prepared as a safety presentation; 

♦  The manufacturer of the manipulator arm (Schilling Robotics) was informed; 

♦  The manufacturer developed and published a safety bulletin (attached); 

♦  The fuse bolt was subjected to failure analysis to better understand why it failed so dramatically. 

The following further actions are recommended: 

♦  Manual operation of manipulator jaws to be conducted prior to energising hydraulics; 

♦  ROV  personnel  should  ensure  when  completing  deck  checks  on  ROV  manipulators  that  the  arm  is  pointing  away  (or 

even outboard) from personnel and assets in the immediate area; 

♦  Access to the area immediately around ROV should be controlled during pre-dive deck checks. 

 

 
Schilling Safety Bulletin 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

