AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/05 

March 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Hand Grinder Injuries 

An IMCA member has reported two recent injuries caused by the use of portable hand grinders. 

The first injury was due to the grinder wheel binding onto the weld being worked upon, causing the grinder to ‘kick’ and 
deflect into his arm.  The grinder’s side grip or stabilisation handle had been removed, making it harder to control the device. 

The second injury happened when the operator lost control of the grinder as a result of his taking one hand off it whilst it 
was still turning at high speed.  He had taken one hand off the grinder because he was attempting to prevent the pipe on 
which he was working from falling when it came out of a support stand.  The grinding wheel was still turning at high speed 
and the gyroscopic precessing force acting on the tool was too great for the operator to handle with one hand.  This led to 
the grinder being deflected into his other arm causing an injury.  

  Reminding  all  persons  operating  grinders  that  they  should  be  used  very  carefully,  referring  to  and  following  all 

The company has recommended the following steps: 

appropriate rules of operation; 

  Taking time for risk assessment before commencing the job; 

  Ensuring that all risks and issues are discussed in toolbox talks; 

  Ensuring the work piece is very secure and cannot move. 

The  company  also  noted  that  there  had  been  some  re-use  of  grinding  discs  that  had  been  used  subsea.    This  practice  is 
dangerous, as grinding discs which have been exposed to moisture are likely to de-laminate, causing them to disintegrate at 
high speed.  Thus discs which have been exposed to moisture over a length of time or which have been used subsea should 
always be discarded. 

2  Leaking Oxygen Valve 

A member has reported an incident whereby which a diver experienced an oxygen leak from his cutting torch whilst on the 
seabed  in  around 27 msw.  The leak  came  out  of the  torch handle  where  the  oxygen  valve housing  and  the torch  handle 
connected. 

The torch was recovered and tested on the surface, where no leaks were observed.  The torch was then sent back to the 
diver, who once again noted a leak at depth.  The torch was again recovered to the surface and the dive was terminated. 

Upon  further  investigation  it  was  noted  that  the  fit-up  between  the  oxygen  valve  housing  and  torch  handle  was  just  tight 
enough  not  to  leak  on  the  surface,  but  at  depth  the  ambient  pressure  was  enough  to  create  an  oxygen  leak  past  the 
trigger/torch handle union. 

The company involved has made the following recommendations to prevent recurrence: 

  A leak test should be performed topside on all torches prior to placing them into service.  If a leak is found, the torch 

should not be placed into service until the leak has been corrected; 

 

If a leak is found coming from the torch handle, the following steps should be taken to correct the leak: 
–  Apply hand pressure to the oxygen valve housing/lever assembly as it is set into the handle and tighten one of the 

set screws while pressure is being applied; 

 

–  Check to ensure that the groove on the oxygen valve housing is in line with the set screw by looking into the torch 

handle via the opening for the set screw that has not been reinserted, located on the opposite side of the handle. 

–  Tighten the other set screw and perform a leak test on the torch.  A leak test should be performed topside on all 

torches prior to placing them into service. 

  The  incident  and  recommendations  should  be  communicated  back  to  the  vendors  of  the  torches.    Vendors  and/or 
manufacturers to be asked to provide QA/QC documentation verifying that each torch oxygen valve housing has been 
inspected and is properly seated. 

Safety Flash 

3  Near-Miss:  Flooding of a Diver’s Helmet  

A member has reported a near-miss that occurred during diving operations.  A diver’s helmet – a Kirby Morgan Superlite 
17B – flooded during the dive.  Fortunately the diver was only at a depth of 3m at the time, a secondary retention system 
was fitted and the diver was able to reach the surface without further problems. 

The initial investigation found that the helmet had become free of the neck dam yoke at the rear and that the rear hinge tab 
was separated from the helmet alignment sleeve.  Normally, correct alignment of the helmet and neck dam yoke would be 
characterised by the helmet alignment sleeve being passed through the rear hinge tab.  In this instance, the helmet was still 
connected at the front and was retained on the diver’s head via the harness upper link assembly ‘earrings’ attached to the 
diver’s harness. 

The  investigation  found  that  the  helmet  came  free  because  the  helmet  had  not  been  correctly  aligned  with  the  neck  dam 
yoke when the diver was being readied for the water.  It concluded that this should have been easily spotted, pointing to the 
need for review of the final checks conducted immediately prior to the dive commencing. 

The company has recommended the following actions: 

  diving  supervisors  must  re-examine  their  diver  dressing  process  and  checks  to  establish  if  both  self-checks  and  cross-

checks are firmly established and being followed by divers and deck crew; 

  diver  equipment  checks  must  be  verbally  communicated between the  diver  in  question, the person dressing  the  diver 

and the diving supervisor. These checks should be logged within the dive logs; 

  divers  should  be  reminded  that  they  are  responsible  for  safety  checks  of  their  own  equipment,  as  far  as  possible.  
A competent person (normally another diver) must physically check that the hat is installed correctly on the neck dam 
prior to the diver entering the water. 

The manufacturer of the helmet, Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc. has provided the following safety information for proper 
dress-in procedures, as per its manual for this equipment: 

i) 

“Prior to diving with any diving helmet, a competent person must ensure that the mechanisms that lock the helmet on 
the  diver’s  head,  as  well  as  all  other  helmet  functions,  are  adjusted  properly  and  operating  correctly,  per  the 
manufacturer’s manual. These checks should be logged in the helmet logbook. 

ii)  Because it is impossible for the diver to see whether the helmet has been latched on correctly, or whether his other 
equipment  has  been  properly  configured,  it  is  essential  that  a  competent  person  (an  experienced  tender  or  another 
diver) assists the diver in dressing in. 

iii)  The diving supervisor is responsible for ensuring the diver is dressed correctly prior to entering the water.  These final 
checks are normally carried out by a competent tender or another diver and should be logged in the diving operations 
(supervisor’s) logbook. 

iv)  Once the diver has entered the water, but before he proceeds with the work of the dive, it is the responsibility of the 
supervisor to ensure that all in-water checks for the diver’s life support equipment are carried out. These checks should 
be logged in the diving operations (supervisor’s) logbook.” 

The manufacturer has also now informed IMCA that it has developed a yoke strap, KMDSI part #505-134 and yoke strap 
guide, KMDSI part #505-138, which can be retrofitted to all Kirby Morgan Superlite 17A/B helmets.  These are now standard 
issue  on  all  Superlite  17  helmets.    These  items  will  help  prevent  separation  of  the  yoke  from  the  helmet,  when  properly 
installed and used.  IMCA is also aware that a number of IMCA diving contractor members have provided alternative systems 
on  such  helmets  which  prevent  the  helmet  becoming  detached  from  the  diver  even  in  the  event  of  the  helmet  and  neck 
clamp  assembly  becoming  separated.    KDMSI  has  noted  “However,  these  items  are  not  a  substitute  for  proper  maintenance  of 
KMDSI helmets, or proper pre-dive inspection of the equipment by the dive, tender and the diving supervisor”. 

