AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/12 

Safety Flash 

  June 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Live Electrical Cable  

A  member  has  reported  a  recent  near  miss  incident  involving  live  electrical  cables  on  board  a  vessel.  The  incident  has 
highlighted  the  importance  of  close  interface  between  contractors  working  onboard  and  the  vessel  crews.  During  the 
demobilization of contractor equipment, the equipment had to be locked out and tagged out to ensure that it was no longer 
live and hence safe before work started.  

The contractor, assisted by vessel crew, locked and tagged out electrical system in the engine control room. Once the power 
was verified as locked out at the equipment and isolated at the breaker in the deck distribution box, work started. During 
the work, the lock out key  was passed to another member of the contractor team  who proceeded to the engine control 
room  to  remove  the  lock  out/tag  out  and  re-energised  the  system.  The  de-energised  cable  from  the  equipment  had  been 
disconnected  and  placed  on  the  chassis  but  when  the  lock  out/tag  out  was  removed  from  the  engine  control  room 
switchboard, the cable became live at 440 volts. 

Assuming that the cable remained de-energized,  another contractor employee  moved  the cable to access the work and in 
that movement and action, his hand was very close to the live cable ends. The live cable ends touched the chassis and arced 
causing a loud bang. An immediate safety stand down was enforced by the contractor. There were no injuries. 

A number of issues were identified which contributed to the incident: 

♦  The job was planned by the contractor without reference to or liaison with the vessel operator or client; 

♦  There was insufficient communication between the contractors’ personnel and the vessel crew; 

♦  There was no job safety analysis (JSA) conducted; 

♦  A permit to work (PTW) should have been required for this kind of electrical isolation work, but was not raised; 

♦  The lock out/tag Out mechanism should have allowed the use of multiple keys; 

♦  A voltage discrepancy for breaker isolation resulted in the contractors’ personnel being unable to confirm zero voltage; 

♦  The deck cabinet was exposed to the elements and not easily accessible, and hence not fit for purpose; 

♦  The electrical drawings were not properly ‘controlled’ documents: There was no drawn by, checked by, approved by and 

no class or type approval; 

♦  The labelling on the breakers was not sufficient to purpose.   

As a result of this incident, which could have resulted in a fatality, eighteen corrective actions were identified and are in the 
process of being implemented. 

For further reference, members may wish to consult the following: 

IMCA M 205 –  Guidance on operational communications; 

IMCA M 206 – A guide to DP electrical power and control systems. 

♦ 

♦ 

 

 

2  Failure to Follow Gas Quad Procedures   

A member has reported an incident in which a quad of  diving quality air was mistakenly connected to a saturation  system 
instead of diving quality oxygen and was injected into the chamber during metabolic make-up. The incident occurred during 
mobilisation operations; two 48 bottle gas quads were delivered to the vessel and were signed for by the on shift life support 
supervisor (LSS). Gas quads of diving quality oxygen had been expected, but a mistake had been made during the ordering 
process and the incorrect gas had been ordered. Diving quality air had been selected instead. 

The  quads  were  delivered  to  the  vessel  and  signed  for  but  no  thorough  checks,  as  per  the  existing  procedure,  were 
completed to identify that it was not the correct type of gas. The quads were removed from the lorry on the quayside and 
then  lifted  aboard  into  the  correct  gas  storage  area.  Later  that  day,  the  on-shift  LSS  went  up  to  the  gas  storage  area  and 
connected the first of the gas quads into the system. However, this task was stopped mid-way through without the full range 
of operational checks being completed, as the LSS left to attend a project briefing. 

Following the completion of the project briefing the LSS did not return to the gas storage area to complete the remaining 
checks for the task. The divers entered the dive chamber system, where saturation control proceeded to blow them down 
to a holding depth of 20 metres of seawater (msw). This blow down was completed using the correct gas from the onboard 
storage.  After  several  hours  in  the  chamber  at  the  holding  depth  the  oxygen  content  (ppO2)  in  the  system  dropped  and 
automatic injection of further oxygen was activated. After approximately 15 minutes the on-shift LSS noticed that following 
the O2 injection the oxygen content (ppO2) had not risen to the expected levels and decided to investigate by inspecting the 
quads on deck. 

On  finding  that  the  attached  quad  was  diving  quality  air  and  not  diving  quality  oxygen,  the  LSS  immediately  isolated  the 
attached  quad  and  vented  any  remaining  air  from  the  system  to  prevent  further  ingress  of  nitrogen  to  the  chamber.  The 
divers in the chamber were checked for any signs of ill effects, but none were found. The incident was reported to the vessel 
management and an investigation began. 

An investigation revealed a number of factors and procedural failures which led to this incident occurring. 

♦  The incorrect type of gas was selected during the ordering process which led to the incorrect type of gas being delivered 

to the vessel;  

♦  There were established company procedures which were not followed: ‘Safe Working Practices – Gas Management. Section 
3.4 All diving breathing mixtures should be checked on receipt and rechecked immediately prior to connecting them to a diving gas 
supply or breathing apparatus charging system. Analysis should additionally be continued whilst on line and in use’ 
– 

the on-shift LSS did not complete all the required company procedural checks to ensure that the gas being received 
and signed for was what the vessel actually required  
the on-shift LSS did not correctly inspect the quad or gas type prior to connecting the quad to the system as per the 
above-mentioned procedural requirements 
saturation control did not fully analyse the gas prior to the automatic injection being activated and the gas entering 
the system, as per the procedural requirements. 

– 

– 

The following actions were taken:  

♦  Robust review and application of existing procedural requirements for gas management;  

♦  Onboard  management  to  create  specific  standing  orders  to  support  the  requirements  and  implementation  of  the  gas 

management procedures; 

♦ 

Identify and clearly communicate who onboard is authorised and competent to receive and verify gas deliveries; 

♦  Vessels to utilise Analox portable ATA analyser to ensure gas analysis is complete before connection to a supply system. 

3  Near Miss: Saturation Diver Lost Gas Supply 

A  member  has  reported  a  near-miss  incident  in  which  a  saturation  diver  on  the  seabed  lost  reclaim  and  immediately 
thereafter, lost his main gas supply. The incident occurred during pipeline free span correction measurements at a depth of 
100m. The diver made his way back to the bell on emergency gas, and while doing so, requested ‘up on my hose’. However 
no such action followed. Slightly over  a minute and  a half later the diver had  made his way unassisted back to the bell on 
emergency gas. As he passed by the bell stand-off ring he became aware that his hose was trapped between the stand-off ring 
and the guide weight. Once the diver was inside, the bell was raised and the umbilical retrieved and inspected for damage. 
The diver was unharmed.  

 
An investigation revealed the following causal factors: 

♦  There was no written procedure for setting the bell directly on the guide weight during dives; 

♦  Egress from the bell was between the guide weight and the stand-off ring rather than between the stand-off ring and the 

lower bell ring; 

♦ 

In-boarding of the bell launch and recovery system (LARS) resulted in a decrease in the gap between the guide weight 
and the stand-off ring which subsequently trapped the excursion umbilical to the extent that gas flow through all lines 
was interrupted. A video image of the gap area was available at the control panel of the LARS but not in dive control. 

It was noted that the following things went right: 

♦  The diver, upon informing his supervisor of the loss of gas, immediately went on emergency gas and started to return to 

♦  The  supervisor  immediately  provided  secondary  gas  from  dive  control  and  advised  the  diver  accordingly.  Gas  to  the 

pneumo-fathometer was also established within seconds; 

♦  The stand-by diver checked and announced full pressure from the bell immediately upon learning that the diver was on 

the bell; 

emergency gas; 

♦  The incident was recorded and retained on the DVD for review and use as historical evidence and training; 

♦  Timely initial advice, incident notifications and follow up documentation to required parties were in place; 

♦  Everyone reacted to the event in a quiet and professional manner without panic. 

 

 

A view of dive bell showing pinch point location  

The following actions were taken and recommendations made: 

♦  A stand down and investigation was initiated prior to continuing diving operations; 

♦  An  enquiry  was  made  to  the  system  manufacturer  as  to  the  intended  method  of  entry  and  exit  from  the  bell.1  It was 
confirmed  that  the  normal  route  was  between  the  stand-off  ring  and  the  lower  bell  ring.  The  use  of  twin  12  litre 
cylinders with flotation attached impeded access through the designed route (540 mm).  The bottom hatch opening is 
itself 700 mm. It was further agreed that the space limitation would compound matters in the performance of a rescue 
dive.  For this reason the route chosen was not altered for the remainder of the project; 

♦ 

Investigation as to the feasibility of modifications to increase the gap to 800 mm are on-going with the manufacturer and 
the owner; 

♦  For subsequent dives a sign was posted at the LARS control console advising landing of the bell upon the guide weight 
while  divers  are  locked  out,  with  reminder  to  confirm  with  the  Supervisor  prior  to  any  movement  of  the  launch 
equipment while diving. A statement to this effect was included in written procedures and communicated throughout the 
company;  

♦  Letters  of  recognition  were  presented  to  key  individuals  involved  on  the  matter  of  a  successful  and  well  performed 

recovery. 

                                                      
1Our member’s policy on guide weight/bell interface position while diving is to set the bell on the guide weight in order to eliminate the pinch point. This 
may be  adhered  to  as  a  general approach however  there  may be  cases where  this  is  less  than  desirable  such as with  ‘light’ bells  or excessive heave. An 
assessment  should  be  done  on  a  case  by  case  basis  accordingly.  Such  an  assessment  should  consider  the  optimum  position  required  for  an  emergency 
rescue. 

 
4  Two Recent Incidents involving Injuries  

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following two safety flashes regarding incidents in which workers onboard 
vessels have injured themselves. 

♦  The  first  incident  occurred  when  a  crewman  was  using  an  electric  angle  grinder  at  the  top  of  a  ladder  and  lost  his 
balance,  dropping  the  grinder,  which  caused  a  cut  above  his  right  knee.  The  report  can  be  downloaded  from 
www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.17.pdf; 

♦  The  second  incident  occurred  when  an  engineer  was  working  on  an  electric  air  compressor  which  had  not  been 
switched  off,  isolated  or  tagged  out.  The  machine  started  up  whilst  his  fingers  were  in  the  path  of  the  fan,  causing 
lacerations of his fingers which resulted in the vessel being re-routed back to port. Isolation of the compressor was not 
conducted  as  the  engineer  deemed  the  task  to  be  a  ‘two  minute  job’.  The  report  can  be  downloaded  from 
www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.18..pdf. 

5  Near Miss: Cable Reel Deck Cargo Broke Loose 

The  Nautical  Institute  (NI)  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  a  wooden  cable  reel, 
weighing about 11 tons, broke loose in heavy seas when a chain link parted. Through swift action on the part of the master 
and the crew, the reel was secured and was not lost.  

The report can be downloaded from  
http://www.nautinst.org/en/forums/mars/mars-2012.cfm/Cable%20reel%20deck%20cargo%20broke%20loose 

 

 

 

