AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/13 

Safety Flash 

 September 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Un-noticed Expiry and Deterioration of Carbon Dioxide Absorbent Material  

A member has reported a near miss incident in which carbon dioxide absorbent material expired and deteriorated beyond 
usable condition. This was discovered when a saturation diver reported an acidic taste in his mouth during a lock-out.   

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  The reclaim tower was found to contain CO2 absorbent with an acidic odour; 

  27 drums of CO2 absorbent had recently been received onboard the vessel as part of a field transfer of materials; 

  The drums were stored in a shaded area behind the dive complex; 

  The  crew  taking  delivery  did  not  check  the  condition  of  the  material  when  it  arrived,  believing  that  the  sender  had 

already checked it prior to delivery; 

  23 of the 27 drums of CO2 absorbent received were found to be discoloured and had an acidic odour; 

  Some of the containers did not have labels attached: some were past their “use by” date, and some were still in date; 

  The  caps  of  the  containers  did  not  seal  correctly,  exposing  the  material  to  salty  moisture,  extreme  heat  and  high 

humidity (tropical environmental conditions); 

  While there was guidance in company manuals on the quantity of CO2  absorbent to be used per man per day, there was 

no company guidance on the correct handling and storage of CO2 absorbent. 

Figure: Showing the discoloured CO2 absorbent material (note flecks 
of stained or off-white pellets). 

Figure: Showing good CO2 absorbent material (note white pellets). 

 

 

 
Our member took the following actions: 

  All  CO2  absorbent  material  found  to  be  discoloured  or  expired  was  immediately  removed  and  replaced  with  fresh 

supplies of in-date absorbent material;   

  Guidance on the correct handling and storage of CO2 absorbent, including guidance on delivery inspection, was prepared 

and issued; 

  Guidance on the management of materials that have a shelf life, and are subject to expiry dates, was prepared and issued.   

The following lessons were learned: 

  Packaging  deterioration  can  occur  during  the  transportation,  handling  and  storage  of  absorbent  material.    Once  seals 
have been compromised and moisture enters storage drums, the shelf-life of the material will shorten dramatically.  This 
is particularly so if the material is stored in high-temperature/high-humidity locations; 

  Some CO2 absorbent drums are supplied without expiry dates from vendors.  These should not be accepted; 

  On  receipt  from  the  vendor,  expiry  dates  should  be  checked  to  ensure  there  is  a  suitable  shelf  life  remaining 

  Whenever materials subject to shelf-life are transferred from a marine-base to a worksite, or from worksite to worksite, 

(recommend a minimum of 1 year); 

expiry dates should be checked; 

 

If any transferred goods are due to expire within six months, then the recipients should be specifically informed; 

  No items that have exceeded their expiry dates should be used; 

  Care should be taken that expiry dates are tracked, and that replacement stock is ordered ahead of expiry; 

  Care should be taken to use consumables in order of their expiry (i.e. use the oldest first);   

  Any items that exceed their expiry dates must be clearly marked as expired and returned to the appropriate marine base 

for disposal. 

2  Bunkering Hose Cut by Propeller 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash,  regarding  an  incident  in  which  a  bunkering  hose  was 
damaged because it sank and fouled the propeller.    

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.20.pdf  

3  Crewman Injured Whilst Changing Out Crane Wire 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash, regarding an incident in which someone was injured while 
changing out the wire on the crane. The injured person was directly in the way of the crane wire when it spring back owing 
to stored mechanical energy, and suffered a small cut just above the eye. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.21.pdf  

4  Spillage of Oil-based Mud 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash, regarding an incident in which an amount of oil based mud 
(OBM) was spilt onto the deck of a newly commissioned platform supply vessel (PSV).  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.22.pdf  
 

 

 
5  Dropped Object Near Miss: Wind Sensor     

A member has reported an incident in which part of a plastic fixed unit wind sensor weighing 0.8kg dropped 10m to the top 
of the bridge roof. The wind sensor fell from the top of the aerial deck to the top of the bridge deck. At the time of the 
incident there were no works taking place on the ROV deck or on the roof of the bridge; there were no injuries. Weather 
conditions at the time were gusting southerly winds at 11m/s or 21.3 Knots, and the vessel was heading into the wind. 

Use of the “DROPS calculator” for this dropped object showed that the potential had it actually hit a person was for a major 
LTI.  

Our member took the following steps: 

  Ensured that all vessel departments have a robust DROPPED Objects inspection regime in place; 

  Ensure all equipment at height is in a planned preventative maintenance program; 

  Check fixed unit equipment to ensure that integral fixings are in place (if possible check securing means). 

Figure 1 - Showing where wind sensor fell, from the top of the aerial deck to the top of the bridge deck 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 - showing wind sensor in situ without it’s lid  

Figure 3 - Showing the lid of the wind sensor (weight 0.8kg) 

 

 

Member’s attention is drawn to the following IMCA material which may be of assistance: 

IMCA SPP 04 - Avoiding dropped objects; 

IMCA SPC 12 - Avoiding dropped objects. 

