SAFETY FLASH 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/18 

 July 2018 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1  Man Overboard: Personnel Transfers by Swing Rope and Personnel Basket 

The  United  States’  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  has  published  Safety  Alert  331  on 
personnel transfers using swing rope and personnel basket.  It relates to a swing rope transfer in the Gulf of Mexico 
between a platform and a boat, when a person fell into the sea.  The person was recovered swiftly by a small boat 
but was injured and subsequently diagnosed with a torn ligament in his elbow requiring surgery. 

BSEE subsequently revisited incident data to determine the frequency of personnel transfer incidents in 2017.  The 
safety alert covers a number of recent incidents.   

 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Due  to  the  frequency  of  personnel  transfer  events  noted,  and  their  potential  consequences,  BSEE  made 
recommendations which are summarised thus: 

  Review the BSEE safety alert with all personnel who transfer to facilities via swing rope or personnel baskets; 

  Before  personnel  transfer,  inspect  and  test  all  hardware  associated  with  the  operation  and  report  any 

deficiencies found; 

  Stress the significance of patience, weather and sea conditions, and the use of the ‘stop work authority’; 

  Consider developing fitness for duty requirements for personnel involved in transfers. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Safety Alert 331 can be found on the BSSE website. 

Members may wish to refer to Guidance on the transfer of personnel to and from offshore vessels and structures 
(IMCA SEL 025) 

Members may also wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

 

Injury during personnel transfer capsule operation 

  Fatality during basket transfer 

2 

Stored Energy: Injury Caused by Failure of Expansion Joint in Fire-Fighting Equipment 

What happened? 

During  a  trial  of  fire-fighting  equipment,  a  hose  expansion  joint  or 
bellows failed.  The release of pressurized water hit a crewman who 
was  standing  nearby,  slamming  him  backward  and  knocking  him 
unconscious.  The fire pump was shut down and help was sought.  CPR 
was administered; subsequently the injured person was medevaced.  

This incident was considered by our member to be a potential fatality.  
The injured person was in hospital for some weeks.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Some identified issues were: 

  There was inadequate management of significant risk; 

  There was no understanding of the life time of the expansion joint 

  There was no installation procedure provided for this bellows by 

  There was no preventive maintenance or inspection/testing of the 

or bellows; 

the manufacturer; 

failed equipment. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Our member drew the following lessons: 

  There had been a similar rupture of a bellows some years previously; this earlier incident was not investigated.  

Had it been investigated, it might have helped in preventing reoccurrence; 

  Engineering  and  design  of  critical  equipment  during  new  building  should  take  into  consideration  personnel 

safety as well as equipment protection; 

  There needs to be a better design review of pressurized equipment, particularly where different components 

are in use. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Ruptured Hydraulic Hoses 

  Failure of a high pressure gas charging hose 

  Working with hoses and pressure 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
3 

Three Fires  

Incident 1: Property damage 

A  vessel  was  carrying  two  (working  and  loaded)  deep  freezers  as  deck  cargo, 
destined for delivery to a platform.  They were stored inside two metal baskets.  
A small fire/smoke was observed coming from one of the deep freezers.   

The  fire  alarm  was  sounded.    All  crew mustered,  initiated  fire-fighting  actions, 
isolated the electrical supply to the deep freezers, and put out the fire using a fire 
extinguisher.  The client was informed.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The deep freezers were old and showed visible signs of lack of maintenance; 

  Even the metal baskets did not have any wire mesh to promote air circulation; 

  May  have  been  due  to  over-heating  due  to  poor  air  circulation  between 

compressor and body of the metal basket. 

What lessons were learned? 

The  deep  freezers  should  have  been  placed  so  as  to  allow  for  adequate  air 
circulation during transit.  

Incident 2: Overheated Lead-acid batteries 

Batteries  for  a  remote  valve  control  system  were  found  overheated  in  an 
instrument room.   

The batteries were Immediately isolated, and the side covers of the battery bank 
opened.  One bank of batteries had heated up and started smouldering.   

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Ventilation to the room was inadequate; 

  There was no regular or adequate inspection of the batteries. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  The undamaged batteries were checked and found satisfactory.  All clips on connectors were also checked for 

its tightness.  Batteries of the affected bank were replaced; 

  Advice was sought from the manufacturer;  

 

Inspection of these batteries to be part of planned maintenance system (PMS). 

Incident 3: Property damage: minor fire in UPS 

A  fire  alarm  went  off  and  smoke  was  discovered  coming  from  a  UPS 
(uninterruptable  power  supply)  room  supplying  power  to  remote  valves.  
The  UPS  was  isolated  from  the  main  supply  and  the  battery  bank  was 
isolated.  A portable CO2 extinguisher was used on the UPS to prevent the 
possibility of fire.  The vessel had to be removed for a time from location 
near a rig.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Operational  guidelines  for  the  equipment  had  not  been  followed.    Planned 
maintenance  procedures  and  manufacturer’s  instructions  for  maintenance  of 
UPS should be followed at all times.  The immediate cause of the incident in this 
case was wear and tear. 

The risk of there being no UPS backup for the cargo valve control system, as a 
result of this kind of occurrence, should be taken into account.  

A  common  theme  in  these  four  fires  is  overheating;  though  batteries  and 
ventilation may also prove to be useful ‘search words’ when looking for similar 
incidents.  

Members may wish to look at the following incidents: 

  Fire in vessel accommodation – overheating notebook computer 

  Diver helmet hat light [overheated owing to lack of cooling] 

  Mobile phone charger failures 

4  Vessel Engine Block Blown Open in and Around Cylinder 

What happened? 

A severe engine failure occurred during a major vessel overhaul.  The connection rod on cylinder #12 parted from 
the connecting rod cap and punched a hole in the engine block.  The engine had been running for 17 hours, carrying 
approximately a 20% load.  

Parts of the engine block were found spread around the engine room, indicating that the outcome of the event 
could have been much worse, with potential for personnel injuries and a fire.  At the time of the event, the engine 
room was vacated for lunch.  No injuries were sustained, there was no spill of fluids and no fire. 

Showing the connection rod on the cylinder blown 

Debris found spread around the engine room 

 

 

through the engine block 

What went wrong? 

Failure to change out and correctly torque up four temporarily installed connection rod bolts.  The four bolts were 
temporarily installed.  Preliminary investigation revealed high pressure on work schedule, poor handovers, lack of 
checklists and incorrect marking of cylinder #12. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Our member noted the following: 

  Focus on correct and sufficient management of change (MoC) and handovers processes; 

  Use of checklists and marking/signage during work on engines; 

 

Limit personnel exposure during start-up of overhauled engines. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Exhaust valve cage assembly blow-out  

5  Accidental Activation of Expired Pyrotechnics (hand flare) 

What happened? 

During a vessel dry dock, smoke was observed coming from a forepeak 
store, which was also accessible from the mess room.  Expired hand 
flare pyrotechnics, boxed and packed up for landing ashore, had been 
accidentally  activated  by  yard  personnel  on  board  for  cleaning  and 
chipping the chain locker. 

The alarm was raised and the necessary steps were taken for the safety 
of the crew and yard personnel. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Procedures were not followed: 

 

the  third-party  contractor  personnel  had  been  briefed 
regarding  the  company’s  safety  management  system  (SMS) 
but this incident still took place 

  where third-party personnel are working, the area should be 
thoroughly  checked  for  any  unsafe  practices  that  can  take 
place.  

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

 

It  was  noted  that  since  the  forepeak  store  was  also  a  provision 
store with access from the mess room, the risk of theft or pilferage could not be neglected; 

  The expired pyrotechnics were sent back to the approved vendor. 

Members may wish to look at the following incidents: 

 

Lost time injury (LTI) caused by inadvertent activation of expired line throwing device  

  Exploding light and smoke marker 

  Disposal of pyrotechnics 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6  Hangar Door Failure and Collapse 

What happened? 

Whilst a vessel was working, there was a failure and collapse of 
the moonpool hangar doors.  Deck crew were working in the area 
of  the  moonpool,  when  they  heard  a  loud  bang.    When  they 
turned  around  they  could  see  that  the  hangar  door  had  fallen 
down  and  folded  in  the  guide  rails.    The  door  was  7.2  meters 
wide, 13 meters high and weighed approximately 200 kg.  There 
were  four  crew  members  in  the  hangar  at  the  time  of  the 
incident.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The suspension points for the hangar door leaf had failed. 

The causes were:  

 

 

Inadequate and weak design for holding hangar door leaf to head box; 

Increased  wear  and  tear  because  there  were  no  formal  instructions  or 
procedure for the operation of the hangar door; 

  Possible additional wear and tear due to suction from the moonpool; 

  Hangar  doors  were  not  part  of  the  recommended  planned  maintenance 
system (PMS), and it was not possible to inspect the suspension points holding 
the door leaf. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Highlight  the 

importance  of  knowing  the  operational 

limitations  or 

requirements for any equipment; 

  Ensure that personnel operating equipment (e.g. hangar doors) are properly 

familiarized with it;  

  Consider further possible risk of potential dropped or falling objects, especially 

where inspection of condition is not possible. 

What actions were taken? 

 

Implemented  proper  instructions  for  the  operation  of  hangar  doors  and 
updated familiarization; 

  6mm stainless steel flat bar was installed inside an aluminium profile holding 
the folding door to header box in order to make the construction more rigid 
and solid; 

 

Installed safety lashings to prevent the folding door upper mount from falling 
to deck if overloaded. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Container door hinges failure: container door fell on deck 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

