AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/08 

Safety Flash

August 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Faulty Governors 

A member has reported a series of incidents involving the shutdown of two different diesel generators onboard a long term 
chartered  vessel.    On  three  separate  occasions  these  incidents  caused  a  full  blackout,  a  partial  blackout  and  the  loss  of  a 
generator.  The DP class II multi-purpose support vessel has four governors of the Woodward PG-EG58 type.  During the 
incident investigation and fault finding process, two suspect governors were removed and replaced with two new units from 
a  separate  batch.    The  two  suspect  governors  were  returned  to  the  manufacturer  for  inspection.    The  results  of  this 
inspection are summarised below: 

♦  Broken check valves were found in the governor oil pumps of both units; 

♦  The oil spray nozzle filters were blocked in both units.  Small metal particles and pieces of check valve were identified; 

♦  The filter in the oil line to the torque motor was blocked in both units.  Small metal particles and pieces of check valve 

were identified; 

♦  Foreign metal particles were found inside one of the governor units.  These particles had caused the filters to become 

blocked, preventing oil flow to the hydraulic valve. 

Although the governor can operate without the check valve, the pieces of broken valve were carried in the hydraulic system.  
This caused malfunction of the hydraulic valve. 

 

 

Blocked oil spray nozzle 

Broken check valve 

Foreign metal 

 

2  Seaeye ROV Tether Arcing Incident 

IMCA member SAAB Seaeye has provided the attached safety news flash regarding an ROV tether arcing incident. 

 

 

 
 
 
15th August 2008 
 
 
Seaeye ROV Tether Arcing Incident 
 
An arcing event was recently witnessed in a Seaeye Cougar XT ROV tether that did not 
trip the systems safety devices; the intermittent arc/fault was only rendered safe following 
human intervention turning off the power. 
 
The incident occurred when the ROV became entangled and the tether damaged. 
 
The arcing did not trip the system’s Line Insulation Monitor (LIM).  Investigations are still 
ongoing but theoretically this could be due to the rapid variation in DC supply introduced 
by the voltage compensation system which can prevent the LIM sensing.  The bandwidth 
and rate of change that can be accommodated by the LIM is currently being investigated 
with the manufacturer. 
 
The  arcs  witnessed  were  consistent  with  “spatter”  type  arcing  which  is  intermittent  in 
nature  and  can  occur  with  very  little  current  draw.    The  current  draw  during  each  arcing 
event  was  insufficient  to  exceed  the  system’s  35A  trip  threshold  and  the  current  draw 
during each arc therefore registered as a legitimate load. 
 
Whilst  considered  very  unlikely  it  is  possible  that  this  fault  could  occur  in  any  XT  ROV 
system  and  operators  should  plan  to  manually  shut  down  the  power  system  should 
unexpected current fluctuations be observed to allow a full investigation. 
 
As  an  additional  measure  operators  can  temporarily  disable  the  voltage  compensation 
facility  on  their  XT  system  whilst  a  conclusion  is  sought  –  instruction  to  do  this  can  be 
obtained by emailing support@seaeye.com 
 
 
 
 
For further information please email:- rovs@seaye.com 
 
 

 
 
Saab Seaeye Ltd 
Address & Registered Office 
Seaeye House 
Lower Quay Road 
Fareham   
PO16 0RQ  
United Kingdom 

 
 
 
 
 

Telephone 
 
+44 (0) 1329 289000   
Fax   
 
+44 (0) 1329 289001   
 

 
 
 
 

Internet Address 
 
www.seaeye.com  
E-mail 
 
jrobertson@seaeye.com 

 

 
 
 

 

Registered in 
England & Wales 
No 02022671  

 
 
 

VAT No 
566 6513 17 
 

 

