AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 25/16 

Safety Flash 

 October 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This safety flash has no single theme, although it is possible that there may be similar learnings that can be drawn 
from them all.  In the first, equipment was damaged by a water jet when the limiting equipment failed on a fire-
fighting monitor.  In the second, we read about the explosion of a PP3 disposable alkaline battery.   

The third incident covers a vessel collision; the fourth, a high potential near miss involving grinding near electrical 
cables.  The fifth incident, the first  safety incident reported by IMCA members which  involves a drone, brings a 
warning to members to use drones carefully and always with the permission of the local authorities.  

1 

Fire-Fighting Water Jet Hits Antenna – Failure of Limits, Stops and Safeties 

A member has reported an incident in which the water jet from a fire-fighting monitor hit an MF/HF whip antenna 
and damaged it.  The incident happened during monthly testing of fire-fighting equipment.  It was discovered that 
the horizontal travel of the fire-fighting monitor went beyond acceptable limits, allowing the water throw to hit 
and damage a nearby whip antenna.  The testing was immediately stopped and damage was assessed.  

 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  Maintenance on this fire-fighting monitor had been carried out earlier by third party contractors; 

  The root cause was determined to be incorrect adjustment of turning limit switch of the fire-fighting monitor; 

 

It was noted that it was important to regularly check the turning and elevation limit switches settings of fire-
fighting monitors. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

  The limiting for the monitor  was  adjusted so that  its throw  remained in a  safe sector of operation with no 

ship’s equipment or structure in line with the water throw; 

  On completion of major maintenance on machinery/equipment, full trial runs and acceptance tests should be 

conducted to ensure satisfactory operations; 

  Machinery  and  equipment  not  used  regularly  during  normal  operation  of  the  vessel  –  such  as  fire-fighting 
monitors  and  pumps  –  should  be  tested  at  regular  intervals  in  accordance  with  the  vessel’s  planned 
maintenance schedule.  Before such tests it should be confirmed that all safety settings and limits installed in 
the system are functioning correctly; 

  Our member reiterated the importance of stopping the job if work is being done in an unsafe manner.  

Members may be aware of an unfortunate incident which occurred on an  offshore support vessel (OSV) during 
September 2016, also during testing of a water cannon, in which one crewman died and three were injured.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search phrase: limit switch): 

 

 

IMCA SF 09/06 – Incident 2 – Fatal accident with lifting appliance [an immediate cause was the failure of a 
limit switch on a crane]; 

IMCA SF 01/13 – Incident 2 – Damage to crane winch [an immediate cause was that the operator disabled a 
limit switch without approval]. 

2  PP3 9V Battery Explosion  

A member has reported an incident in which a PP3 9-volt battery exploded.  A loud bang was heard on the vessel 
bridge.    Initially  the  noise  was  believed  to  be  a  lightbulb  failing,  but  no  trace  could  be  found  other  than  some 
debris embedded in a partition wall and a fragment which landed on a surveyor’s shoulder. 

After conducting a thorough search, a PP3 type 9-volt battery was discovered wrapped in a piece of paper with 
the  terminals  taped  over  ready  for  disposal.  The  bottom  was  blown  off  the  battery  housing  exposing  the 
individual ‘AAAA’ batteries inside.  Fortunately, there were no injuries. 

 

 

 

 

The following causal factors were identified: 

  The battery was used beyond its recommended expiry date (see 3rd image); 

  As a result of this over-use, one or more internal cells had leaked causing an internal short circuit; 

  The battery overheated causing catastrophic failure. 

Our member took the following actions: 

  Vessel  checked  for  similar  brand  or  make  of  battery  –  two  such  batteries  were  found  in  packaging,  both 

expired.  These were disposed of safely; 

  Further checks were made of all other batteries currently in use or in stock to ensure expiry dates were not 

exceeded; 

  Safety flash was issued to company globally and IMCA. 

Whilst  this  incident  involved  a  disposable  alkaline  battery,  members  will  note  that  there  have  been  explosions 
reported which have been caused by failure or malfunction of: 

 

Lead-acid  batteries  (IMCA  SF  05/13  –  Incident  1  –  Explosion  causing  fatal  injury  during  maintenance  of 
metocean buoy); 

 

Lithium-ion batteries (IMCA SF 17/14 – Incident 2 – Lithium battery pack explosion). 

All batteries involve dense storage of large amounts of energy, and as such, contain inherent hazards.  Members 
may wish to reiterate the importance of good battery management for all forms of batteries, whatever battery 
chemistry may be involved.  This should particularly be the case for rechargeable Lithium-ion batteries. 

3  Collision Between Vessels 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a collision between a survey vessel and a pipe-carrying 
vessel.    The  incident  occurred  during  vessel  manoeuvring  inside  an  anchor  pattern.    A  survey  vessel  was 
instructed  by a  pipe  laying  barge  to  proceed  towards  the  pipe-carrying  vessel  which  was  tied  up  alongside  the 
barge, and then to moor alongside to complete a crew change.  Upon entry of the 500m zone, the survey vessel 
was travelling at a speed of 4 knots maintaining a direct heading toward the barge.  This was necessary because of 
the location of the mooring lines for the barge anchor pattern. 

The Chief Officer attempted to slow down and change the heading on a distance of about 200m from the moored 
pipe-carrying  vessel  but  identified  the  inability  to  alter  the  azimuth  direction.    The  vessel  Master,  on  taking 

 
command, attempted to alter the course of the vessel using the bow thrusters but to no effect.  The survey vessel 
subsequently made contact with the pipe-carrying vessel causing some damage. 

 

 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  There was a loss of control over both azimuth thrusters: 

  Potentially the autopilot system engaged due to some mechanical failure or to human error 
  Neither the  manufacture’s  representatives  or  service  engineer,  nor  the  investigation team could  advise 

on the definite cause; 

  A potential contributory factor was design deficiency: 

  One single switch controlled both “independent” steering systems 
  Autopilot option overrode both azimuth thrusters, with no automatic disengagement available 
  When the autopilot is engaged it is not visually apparent to the operator 
  The ergonomics of the bridge console layout could potentially result in an alternative identical switch in 

the same vicinity as the autopilot switch (in this case, the gyro selector) being operated; 

  The  500m  zone  vessel  speed  requirements  were  not  followed  –  despite  the  requirement  for  a  maximum 
vessel  speed  of  2  knots  in  this  particular  safety  zone,  a  speed  of  4  knots  was  maintained  for  most  of  the 
distance, with further and possibly consequent failure to stop the vessel in close proximity to barge (around 
200m away); 

  Company  requirements  for  vessel  heading  were  not  followed  –  procedures  forbade  the  use  of  offshore 
installations  as  navigational  waypoints.    The  bridge  crew  on  the  survey  vessel  steered  directly  towards  the 
barge; 

  The  incident  was  not  reported  to  the  company  ashore  in  a  timely  way  or  through  appropriate  and  proper 

channels. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search word: collision): 

IMCA SF 11/11 – Incident 5 – Collision between OSV and barge; 

IMCA SF 12/15 – Incident 3 – Collision between crew boat and anchored barge; 

IMCA SF 10/16 – Incident 1 – Vessel in collision with floating dock. 

 

 

 

4  High Potential Near Miss Incident: 440v Cable Damaged by Grinder 

A member has reported an incident in which live 440v cables were damaged by a grinder.  The incident occurred 
during a vessel mobilisation, when a rigger/welder was tasked with fitting cable protection covers over a bundle 

 
of 4 x cables which had been run across the aft deck.  They were routed across the deck from the on-board Reel 
Drive System.  Rubber cable protection covers had originally been fixed in place, but these fixings had dislodged.  
The rigger/welder advised that more robust covers could be fabricated (out of aluminium), which he proceeded 
to do in a designated hot work area.  Whilst the vessel was alongside, the rigger/welder proceeded to install the 
newly fabricated covers. 

During this time the angle on the covers had to be altered so they would neatly butt up against each other.  On 
several occasions the rigger/welder removed the covers to a more suitable location on deck to modify or improve 
the fit.  On the last modification the cable protection covers were left in place and the rigger/welder proceeded to 
grind over the bundle of cables, making contact with the live 440v, 250A cable.  

Cables routed across the deck 

Prefabricated Aluminium covers 

 

 

Damaged cable 

 

When  he  realised  that  cable  had  been  damaged,  the  rigger/welder  immediately  stopped  the  job  and  applied 
insulating tape to the cable, to prevent any ingress from the damp conditions.  He was not aware that the cable 
was live.  He then reported the incident.  Around two hours later, the power to the damaged cable was isolated at 
the supplying junction box and a pad-lock put in place as a lock-out mechanism, as per company procedures.  

 
Our members’ initial investigation revealed the following: 

  The task was not properly planned or risk assessed:  

  The Permit to Work did not cover this specific task (it covered Hot Work/Welding/Grinding only) 
  The Job Risk Assessment (JRA) did not cover grinding in vicinity of live electric cables or the requirement 

for electrical isolations of the cables; 

  The toolbox talk was not specific to the task being undertaken by the rigger/welder; 

  There were no isolations in place whilst working next to live electric cables; 

  Electrical  isolation  was  not  applied  immediately  after  the  incident,  and  did  not  occur  until  2.5  hours  later, 

posing further risks to other crew members working on deck/in the vicinity. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search word: electrical): 

 

 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 3 – Near miss: exposed live electrical cable; 

IMCA SF 14/15 – Incident 3 – Electrical shock – failure of isolations and barriers. 

5  Consequences of Launching a Drone from A Vessel in The Suez Canal 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  the  Suez  Canal 
Authority has recently detained a vessel following the launch of 
a drone to photograph the vessel proceeding through the Suez 
Canal.    During  the  Suez  Canal  Authorities  (SCA’s)  subsequent 
inspection, they confiscated the drone and its memory card and 
the vessel was detained in anticipation of further investigations 
by the Egyptian authorities. 

Although the intention when launching the drone was simply to 
document  the  vessel  proceeding  through  the  Suez  Canal,  the 
use of the drone may have been considered a threat to national 
security by the Egyptian authorities. 

Our  members’  recommendation  was  that  drones  and  unmanned  aircrafts  should  not  be  used  in  port or  sailing 
within a country’s territorial waters except for official reasons and with agreed permission of the authorities and 
company. 

Members  will  note  that  the  developing  drone  technology  can  be  used  for  illegal  purposes  as  well  as  for  valid 
commercial  purposes.    There  are  currently  no  common  or  international  rules  governing  the  use  of  drones.  
Regulations concerning the use of drones differ from one country to another and failure to comply with any given 
legislation may lead to a criminal prosecution.  Members are recommended to be fully aware of, and comply with, 
any local regulations concerning the use of drones and unmanned aircraft in countries where their operations are 
taking place.  

