AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/13 

Safety Flash 

  June 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

on MODUs 

1  USCG  Homeport  Marine  Safety  Alert:  Recent  Failures  of Dynamic Positioning  (DP)  Systems 

 

The  United  States  Coast  Guard  has  recently  issued  the  attached  Marine  Safety  Alert  about  recent  failures  of  dynamic 
positioning systems on mobile offshore drilling units. 

Clarification has been sought on the following recommendations from the safety alert:  

“Where ride-through capability is an essential part of the DP redundancy concept, it should be proven by live short circuit 
and ground fault testing.” 

“Perform regular thermal imaging surveys of DP system electrical equipment (e.g. switchgear, drives, motor controllers, etc.) 
as part of a preventative maintenance program to provide early detection of faulty or loose connections.” 

The response, which should be noted, was: 

  Guidance does state that analysis and proper planning is required to undertake short circuit testing; 

  The intent is to do this not at FAT, but on the vessel, with appropriate planning and safety precautions; 

  Additional guidance is provided in the Marine Technology Society Techop guidance; 

  One of the objectives is to have the test validate the model, so that subsequent testing can be done with analytical and 

modelling techniques based on a validated model; 

  Any short circuit testing is to be accompanied by the proper planning and with appropriate risk mitigating measures in 

place. 

We  would  also  like  to  draw  attention  to  the  guidance  contained  within  IMCA  M  217/IMCA  SEL  031  Offshore  Vessel  High 
Voltage Safety.  

The  safety  flash  draws  attention  to the  Marine  Technology  Society’s  operational  guidance  which  is  available  from  the  MTS 
dynamic positioning website www.dynamic-positioning.com. It should be noted that this guidance refers extensively to IMCA 
guidance. 

 

 

 

