Safety Flash 

 December 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 31/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

What happened? 

1  Potential Engine Room Flooding: Maintenance and Equipment Failure Issues on A Laid-Up Vessel 

A seawater cooling line failed during planned maintenance on a vessel in “cold” lay-up.   

An engineer and an AB were conducting planned maintenance on vessels in “cold” lay-up.  The engineer opened a 
sea chest and necessary cooling lines and started an auxiliary generator.  After watching it run for 10 minutes, he 
left  the  engine  room  and  carried  out  visual  checks  elsewhere  on  the  vessel.    Once  these  visual  checks  were 
complete, he left the vessel and went to another cold laid-up vessel to conduct similar checks.  An AB was left on 
the main deck of the vessel with the auxiliary generator running.  

After approximately one hour, the engineer returned to the vessel.  On reaching the engine room he noticed a 
strong water spray on the engine from the sea water cooling line.  He immediately activated the emergency shut-
down.  As the shutdown was not enough to reduce the water flow, the engineer attempted to shut off the isolating 
valve supplying sea water from the main sea chest – but it was seized.  Finally, the valves mounted before and after 
the sea chest were shut off, and the water flow was stopped.  Although there was no damage, this near miss had 
the potential for major equipment damage or loss of the vessel. 

Failed hose clamp, mounted on the discharge 

Hose clamp condition - in use on suction side of sea water 

side 

cooling pump, found on the day of investigation, on the same 

 

 

engine where the failure occurred  

 

 

  Procedures: 

Actions taken 

Lessons learnt 

 
What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Equipment failure: 

  The failure on the cooling line was traced to a broken hose clamp with signs of corrosion, which allowed a 

flexible hose to get disconnected from the rigid connecting pipe 

  The intermediate valves from the crossover sea chest line were found to be seized; 

  The crew did not have portable radios, so there was no remote communication between the crew members 
  Crew on laid-up vessels did not have access to the company’s document management system, and hence 

no access to the company safety management system (SMS) and other important information 

  Repair and maintenance conducted were not being recorded in the company planned maintenance system 
  Vessel crew were unaware of documented company emergency response plan and procedures 
  Vessel crew were unsure of whom to contact for daily operational needs. 

  46,000 litres of oily water were pumped out of the engine room bilges.  Due to lack of information, it could not 

be confirmed whether this amount was all due to the incident or possibly could have been there before that; 

 

 A new hose clamp was installed, the engine tested and all found to be in good order. 

  Advanced  deterioration  of  parts,  equipment  and  emergency  batteries  on  laid-up  vessels  suggest  that  there 

should be more rigorous inspection and control of conditions on such vessels; 

  There should be better management of planned maintenance procedures, and of safety management systems 

on laid-up vessels, including the possibility of setting up temporary alarms as appropriate;  

 

It is important to ensure that appropriate communications (email etc) are maintained to and from vessels in 
lay-up. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Failure Of Pipework In Fuel Tanks 

2  Bow Thruster Room Flooded During Fresh Water Transfer Operation  

What happened? 

A  vessel’s  bow  thruster  room  was  flooded  during  fresh  water  transfer  operations.    The  plan  was  to  complete 
receiving fresh water in Tank No. 2 Centre first before moving to simultaneously fill Tank No. 1 Port & Tank No. 1 
Starboard, while ensuring using soundings that neither tank was overfilled.   

The Duty Motorman (about to end his shift) stopped receiving water into Tank No. 2 Centre believing that it had 
filled up, and transferred the supply to tanks No. 1 Port & Tank No. 1 Starboard as per the agreed plan.   

The incoming Duty Engine Cadet sounded Tank No.2 Centre and realized that it was not yet full.  This prompted him 
to stop and remove the transfer hose from Tank No.1 Port and returned the supply to Tank No.2 Centre.  This tank 
had its sounding pipe linked to the bow thruster room.  

Consequently, fresh water flooded the bow thruster room via the sounding pipe which was not locked, to the extent 
that the generator in the bow thruster room was submerged to about 2/3 of its height.  

  The sounding pipe of Tank No. 2 Centre was not closed (this was the sounding pipe linked to the bow thruster 

What went wrong? 

room); 

 

 
  There was no adequate risk assessment of the fresh water transfer operation.  There was no toolbox talk or 

discussion with the crew of the operation or the risks involved; 

  The bilge emergency alarm was neglected by the Duty Engine Cadet; 

  The emergency response plan was not followed during this incident. 

What were the causes? 

  Negligent watch-keeping practice; 

  Poor supervision of task;  

  Poor handover or shift change procedures; 

Lessons learnt  

  Requirement for 24/7 watch-keeping in the engine room; 

  Better handling of shift change and handover processes; 

  Better supervision required particularly of trainee (Cadet) personnel; 

  Deeper crew understanding of emergency response safety drills particularly for bow thruster flooding. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Water Ingress To Bow Thruster Space  

 

July 2010 – very similar incident: Some “Key Issues” highlighted at that time: 
- 
- 

Failure of basic watch-keeping practices; 
Lack of understanding of Chief Engineer’s Standing Orders; 

3 

Lost Time Injury – Person Slipped on The Stairs and Broke His Arm 

What happened? 

A member of the engine room team suffered a serious injury to his left 
forearm while carrying a pail of lubrication oil from the steering flat to the 
engine  room.    He  was  carrying  the  pail  on  his  right  shoulder with  both 
arms in support, and descending some stairs.  With two steps remaining, 
he stepped on a slippery step and his right foot became trapped between 
the steps.  He lost his balance, slipped and fell.  When he landed on the 
deck his left arm took most of the impact.  First aid was applied with using 
a splint.  The injury and swelling of the affected area did not seem to be 
severe.    However,  upon  arrival  in  port,  he  was  referred  to  hospital  for 
further treatment and it was confirmed that his left arm was broken.   

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The immediate causes: 

  He was going down the stairs without holding the handrail; 

  The stairs were slippery; 

  His foot got caught. 

Showing re-enactment 

The weather was calm; the vessel was neither rolling nor pitching.  The crewman involved was well rested and was 
wearing correct personal protective equipment (PPE). 

Our member found the root causes to be: 

Inadequate compliance with correct lifting and carrying technique – there was a right way and a wrong way to 
transfer this lubrication oil, and he chose the wrong way; 

 

 

 
  Risk seen as tolerable – “complacency” – this was a routine and recurring task. 

Lessons learnt/Actions taken 

  Could there be a better or safer way to transfer this oil? 

  All should be more safety conscious when going down the stairs, 

particularly if carrying things; 

  Handrails should be used; correct lifting and carrying procedures 

  Good house-keeping – ensure stairs, floors, safety shoes etc. are 

should be followed; 

kept free of oil and grease. 

Please refer to IMCA’s safety promotional materials: 

  Short video – Preventing Slips and Trips 

  Poster – Take care on the stairs 

  Poster – Preventing slips, trips and falls 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Recent Slips, Trips and Falls Involving Stairs 

  Slips, Trips and Falls – Raising Awareness 

 

Injury After Crewman Fell Downstairs On External Stairway (MSF) 

4 

Fires on Materials Made of Fibre-Reinforced Plastic (FRP)  

What happened? 

A member reports that serious fires have broken out on vessels with 
fibre-reinforced plastic (FRP) materials.   They appear to have  been 
caused by overheating of the FRP from hot exhaust systems.  FRP is 
combustible  and 
introduces  several  challenges  compared  to 
traditional  non-combustible  materials.    It  is  imperative  that  safety 
barriers and fire safety measures are in place. 

A fire was thought to have originated in FRP panels above the exhaust 
in an area between the main engine room and the adjacent casing.  
Maintenance  of  the  engines  had  previously  been  carried  out, 
requiring  removal  of  insulation.    The  fire  was  contained,  but  with 
extensive material damage. 

Fibre Reinforced Polymer (FRP) materials  

With  the  appropriate  choice  of  resin, 
additive  and 
fillers,  Fibre  Reinforced 
Polymer  (FRP)  materials  can  be  used  to 
make structures with clear fire performance 
benefits  over  many  other  materials.  In 
addition,  FRP  composites  generally  are 
insulators,  so  they  can 
good  thermal 
significantly 
fire 
spreading  in  the  way  that  can  occur  with 
metals. 
In  addition,  FRP  composites 
generally  are  good  thermal  insulators,  so 
they can significantly limit the heat of a fire 
spreading  in  the  way  that  can  occur  with 
metals. 

limit  the  heat  of  a 

A fire had likely started in a compartment with direct access to open 
air and adjacent to an auxiliary engine room.  The engine exhaust was 
routed through the compartment housing the silencer or muffler.  A 
low-pressure  cooling  water  alarm  was  experienced  followed  by  a  high  temperature  cooling  water  alarm,  but 
without activation of the automatic engine shutdown.  The vessel had to be evacuated and was declared a total 
loss 

Source: 
UK 
https://compositesuk.co.uk/  

Composites 

Association 

Trade 

In both cases, there were no reported injuries to any persons. 

Incident 1 

Incident 2 

 

 
What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The immediate causes of the fires were likely to be due to: 

  Combination of missing insulation on FRP structural surfaces exposed to heat radiation or direct contact with 

hot exhaust parts and limited engine room ventilation; 

  Overheating of exhausts could also develop suddenly due to insufficient cooling water; 

 

Issues with temperature sensors or the malfunction of the shutdown system. 

The ignition point of FRP materials is typically around 275° to 375°C, which is relatively low compared to metallic 
materials,  i.e.  aluminium  alloys  or  steel.    The  typical  operating  temperatures  of  engines  and  exhausts  can  be 
considerably  higher  and  there  is  an  inherent  risk  of  fire  if  safety  measures  are  not  satisfactorily  arranged  or 
managed. 

Recommendations 

  Thorough and regular maintenance of machinery and associated parts, with regular check of known or potential 

hot spots and any signs of overheating; 

  When removal of insulation is necessary during modifications or other work, the insulation should be correctly 

reinstalled and restored to at least the original condition; 

  Adequate training of vessel crew for emergency preparedness. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Fire In Engine Space On Crew Transfer Vessel (CTV) 

  Engine Room Fire 

  Engine Room Fires – Appropriate Use Of Insulating Material On Hot Surfaces 

5 

Two Cases of Contaminated Drinking Water 

What happened? 

In the first incident, fresh water analysis carried out by a 3rd party 
indicated an increase in TVC (total viable count) of bacteria in the 
fresh  water  system  of  some  vessels.    Inspection  of  vessels’  fresh 
water tanks revealed that they were dirty and had not been cleaned 
or maintained for a long time.  See image to the right of mud in the 
freshwater tank: 

In  the  second  incident,  a  drinking  water  quality  check  was 
conducted  in  accordance  with  the  office  health  assurance  plan.  
Upon  sending  the  water  dispenser  to  a  laboratory  for  an  annual 
“water quality assurance test”, the test results showed a high level 
of bacteria in  the water.  The water purchasing process  from the 
current supplier was stopped immediately. 

Thorough  cleaning  of  the  water  pumps  and  dispensers  was 
arranged, and a new supplier of drinking water was approved.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  There  was  a  recurring  failure  to  inspect  and  maintain  vessel 

fresh water tanks; 

 

 
  There was no regular or appropriate cleaning of water dispensers & hand pumps.  The office water dispensers 
and water pumps have not been cleaned for a long time.  This could have resulted in the contamination of the 
water and subsequent potential health problems for staff. 

Actions taken 

  Vessel fresh water tanks should be regularly inspected and cleaned; 

  Drinking water bottles should not be re-used; 

  Arranged for proper and scheduled cleaning of fresh water dispensing equipment; 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Aluminium Fresh Water Tanks: Near Collapse Due To Serious Corrosion 

 

