AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/06 

June 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near-Miss: Missing Grating on Platform in Fuel Tank 

IMCA has received a report of a near-miss involving workers entering a cargo tank.  Workers descending a ladder into the 
tank found that there was no grating platform at the foot of the ladder, leaving an unprotected drop to the bottom of the 
tank. 

The grating platform was of a commonly used removable type with hinges, often used when the inspection access hatch is 
combined with the access for hoisting injured persons and/or for maintenance purposes or tank entry sampling.  It had been 
left in a lifted or open position earlier to permit equipment or tools to be hoisted from the tank.  No information concerning 
this had been passed to the workers descending into the tank. 

No accident took place, but it could have led to be a very serious casualty had it not been discovered. 

The following lessons learnt have been noted: 

  The hinged design, though convenient, may compromise safety, as it introduces a significant potential hazard for a tank 

entry team.  A fatal accident has previously been reported where a similar platform was fitted 

  When a hinged grating platform is installed: 

the risk that the platform is left in the open position should be taken into account in the procedures for tank safe 
entry and discussed at toolbox meetings prior to entering the tank 
cargo tank entry hatches should be fitted with warning signs   

  The recommended checklist for safe entry of confined spaces should be modified to include: 

a check that the platform is in the correct position before descent 
a check that the platform locking pin has been refitted after the platform has been replaced 

  The  safe  operation  procedure  for  opening  and  closing  of  the platform  should  be  included  in  the  permanent  means  of 

access manual (PMA) for newly built vessels. 

– 

– 

– 
– 

2  Recall of Pains Wessex White Collision Warning Hand Flares 

Pains Wessex has announced a recall of its white collision warning (MK7) hand flares, item number 52651.  The recall follows 
a recent incident in which an individual was seriously injured while using this flare.  Pains Wessex has identified that there 
may be a risk that some of these white flares will not fire as intended.  All white flares are therefore being recalled as a safety 
precaution.  

 

No red (MK7) hand flares nor any other Pains Wessex products are being recalled.  The recall does not affect Pains Wessex 
Australia Aurora hand flares. 

The Pains Wessex white collision warning (MK 7) hand flare, item number 52651 is sold on its own and is also contained as a 
part of the company’s collision warn-off kit and the ORC RORC distress kit as illustrated below. 

Safety Flash 

Customers  with  in-date  Pains  Wessex  white  collision  warning  (MK7)  hand  flares  are  advised  not  to  use  the  flare  and  are 
asked to return it immediately to the place of purchase where the purchase price will be refunded.  If unable to return the 
flare to the place of purchase, customers may take the flare to their nearest chandler. 

Customers with out-of-date Pains Wessex white collision warning (MK7) hand flares should contact Pains Wessex on +44 
(0) 23 9262 3965. 

To assist its customers with this recall, Pains Wessex has set up a help line during office hours on +44 (0) 23 9262 3962, or 
the company can be contacted via email at recall@pwss.com  

 

 

 

 

 

