AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/13 

Safety Flash 

  September 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  LTI: Dropped Object Incident  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  someone  sustained  a  serious  neck  injury  as  a  result  of  a  dropped  object 
incident. The incident occurred whilst members of the crew were using a chain block/tackle assembly on a H-beam, to assist 
with manoeuvring the heavy lids to the chain lockers which were located on a mezzanine deck. As chain locker lids are too 
heavy to move manually, two months previously, an H-beam had been installed in this location to permit the use of a chain 
assembly/trolley.  

One of the persons conducting the work manually pulled the chain aside; momentum caused the trolley for the chain block 
assembly to run along the H-beam track. There was no end stopper and the trolley fell off the H-beam. It fell approximately 
1.2  meters,  glancing  off  the  injured  person’s  helmet  and  landing  on  deck.  The  total  weight  of  the  trolley  and  chain  block 
assembly was approximately 33 kg. The injured person walked off the job unaided, and was attended by the onboard medic. 
The initial prognosis was a fractured neck. A neck brace was applied and then the injured party was medivaced by helicopter.  

Figure 1 - General arrangement on mezzanine deck 

 

 H Beam Chain Locker 500Kg Chain Locker Lid 3m  

         Figure 2 - H-beam with missing ‘Trolley Stopper’ 

 

 Figure 3 - Chain Assembly 

    
 

 

Our member’s initial investigation noted the following immediate causes: 

  There was no ‘trolley stopper’, or similar device, on the H-beam, to prevent chain assembly/trolley from falling off the 

end of the beam;  

  The injured person was working under a unsecured load and ostensibly unaware of the consequences of pulling the chain 

assembly along H-beam when there was no trolley stopper; 

  The injured person disconnected the chain from chain locker lid. 

Our member noted the following root causes to the incident: 

  Organisation 

instructions were not followed; 

-  Although  there  were  four  persons  working  on  the  particular  job,  there  was  a  lack  of  supervision,  as  work 

-  Work equipment was allowed to be used, despite being known and identified as ‘faulty’. The day before the incident 
it had been reported that there was no ‘trolley stopper’ on the retrofitted H-beam. No action was taken to address 
this very serious omission;  

-  The potential of falling objects was not recognised or identified as a foreseeable and significant risk.   

  People 

  Environment 

-  Work instructions were not followed. The injured person disconnected chain from chain locker lid; this was not a 
specified work instruction within documentation, nor instruction from the lead AB. The injured person appeared to 
have been working from his own initiative in undertaking this action.  

-  There  was  a  lack  of  situational  awareness.  The  injured  person  and  his  colleagues,  whilst  familiar  with  the  generic 
activity of opening chain locker doors, were not familiar with the new H-beam and the overhead chain assembly tool 
and this may have contributed to the incident occuring. It was noted that this was the first time the H-beam/chain 
assembly tool arrangement had been used at this worksite.  

Our member took the following actions:  

 

Installed a trolley stopper on that particular H-beam; 

  A fleet-wide “time out for safety” was carried out, and further DROPS awareness training was organised;  

  A DROPS survey was performed with all similar beams inspected and maintained at member worksites; 

  Checked certifications of H-beam, lifting equipment and chain assembly requested for inspection. 

Members’ attention is drawn to the following IMCA material which may be of assistance: 

IMCA SPP 04 - Avoiding dropped objects; 

IMCA SPC 12 - Avoiding dropped objects. 

 

 

 

 
2 

Incidents Involving Use of Scaffolding    

A member has reported a number of incidents involving the use of scaffolding. Many activities on members’ vessels have to 
be done at locations which  are hard to access or at  a height. In order to be able to work at these locations scaffolding is 
erected. To ensure a safe and stable platform to work from, scaffolding is built according to industry standards and practices; 
a competent person should inspect the scaffolding before use, and tags are used to indicate if a scaffolding is safe to access or 
not. Despite these and other precautions,  crew should still remain fully  aware of their own safety and the safety of others 
when using scaffolding. 

Four recent scaffolding related incidents, each with a brief summary as to the immediate cause: 

Incident #1 - after a test blow of a hydraulic hammer, it was discovered that a scaffold pipe was damaged between the anvil 
and the casing. 

Immediate cause: Although the site was inspected, the hazards were not recognised. 

  

Incident #2 - a crewman was injured after tripping over a scaffold tube (supporting the handrail) whilst carrying an angle bar 
of approximately 15 kg.   

Immediate causes: Poor co-ordination of the work activities, and there was no signage in place to warn of the obstacles. 

Incident  #3  -  during  renewal  and  repair  activities,  a  plate  supporting  scaffolding  was  removed  and  replaced  with  a  metal 
plate without having the scaffolding inspected by a competent person.  

Immediate causes: Lack of sharing information between supervisors; owing to time pressure a “solution” was found instead of stopping 
the job. 

Incident #4 - scaffolding boards, which were out of sight, on top of the exhaust line, were left over from repair works and 
started to smoulder due to the heat of the exhaust line. 

Immediate cause: Improper housekeeping after work was finished. 

Scaffold pipe hits anvil of hydraulic 

Tripping over scaffold board 

Smouldering scaffold boards 

 

 

 

hammer 

Our member drew the following lessons: 

  Perform a full workplace risk assessment before starting the work;  

  Keep walkways clear of obstacles, or otherwise mark obstacles; 

  Never modify scaffolding;  

  Remove all scaffolding material after the job, and contact scaffolding supervisor when scaffolding material is left behind.  

3  Fire on Board and Sinking of Liftboat Mako  

The National Transportation Safety Board of the United States (US NTSB) has published the following safety flash regarding  
the  US-registered  liftboat  Mako,  which  caught  fire  while  supporting  oil  drilling  operations  about  6  miles  off  the  coast  of 
Nigeria. No one on board was injured, but the Mako was a total loss in the accident. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.ntsb.gov/doclib/reports/2013/MAB1314.pdf    

 
4  Diving Helmet: Failure of Sealed Pull Pin 

A member has reported an incident without injury in which the knob of a sealed pull pin assembly (p/n 505-110) on a Kirby 
Morgan  diver’s  helmet  came  apart.  The  incident  occurred  after  an  air  dive,  when  the dive  team  was  assisting  the  diver  to 
remove his helmet. On the block side of the hat, the sealed pull pin came apart whilst undressing the diver. Upon inspection, 
the dive team found that the threaded part of the shaft on the plunger, at the base of the threading, just above the square 
key,  had  broken  and  the  knob  had  separated  from  the  pull  pin  assembly.  The  Nyloc  lock  nut  was  connected  to  the  top 
threaded  section  and  still  in  the  end  of  the  knob.  All  parts  of  the  pull  pin  assembly  were  recovered.  Both  sealed  pull  pin 
assemblies on the helmet were removed and replaced.  

Our  member  contacted  Dive  Lab  to  discuss  the  incident.  From  photographs  and  information  sent  by  our  member,  it  was 
determined that the pull pin shaft had crevice corrosion.  

Kirby Morgan strongly recommend that the tender, stand-by diver, or at least a second person, ALWAYS perform a pre-dive 
check  that  includes  checking  the  sealed  pull  pins  to  ensure  that  both  are  functioning  correctly  and  are  fully  engaged  and 
latched in the closed position prior to each and every dive. 

Helmet sealed pull pin slot after failure 

 

 

 

 

 

Plunger 

Breakage 
point 

Nyloc 
lock nut 

knob 

Parts of failed sealed pull pin 

The following actions were recommended: 

  Pre- and post-dive checks; 

  Regular careful inspection of pull pin assemblies, in accordance with Dive Lab checklist appendices A2.1, A2.2 and A2.23; 

  Regular check of pull pins for signs of leakage and corrosion, and to ensure that pull pins are operating properly; 

  All  torque  specifications  for  fasteners  (10-15  inch/lbs  for  the  Nyloc  Lock  Nut  on  the  pull  Pin  assemblies)  should  be 

strictly followed. 

Kirby Morgan notes that the following further information is available at www.kirbymorgan.com: 

  Pull Pin Overhaul procedure www.divelab.com/assets/pdf/training-guides/Pull_Pin_Procedure.pdf;   

  Bulletin #2 of 2013: Sealed Pull Pin Inspection & Maintenance; 

  Bulletin #6 of August 23, 2011 New Kits Part Numbers 425-090, 425-099, 525-211, 525-373, 525-385 and 525-718; 

  Bulletin #7 of December 1, 2010 Change to Product Bulletin 530-110 Lock Nut Replaces 330-320 Lock Nut. 

 
5 

Injury - Failure of Hatch Holdback Arrangements    

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash, regarding an incident in which a crew member was injured 
when  there  was  a  failure  of  the  mechanism  holding  back  a  heavy  watertight  door.  The  incident  occurred  because  the 
arrangements for holding back the door were not adequate.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.32.pdf  

