AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/00 

Safety Flash 

December 2000 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Dangerous Transformers 

One of our members has informed us that one of their vessels, operating in the Gulf of Mexico, has reported that a number 
of ‘dangerous transformers’ have appeared onboard from an unknown source. 

Overleaf is a picture of one of the transformers. 

  The transformers have no earth and thus do not comply with relevant class (class I equipment – earthed) for appliances 

of this kind; 

produce 440v; 

  The transformers are not double insulated and in fact have a metal casing.  This does not comply with the relevant class 

(class II equipment – double insulated) for appliances of this kind; 

  The lead has two plugs and the transformer two sockets.  It is possible to plug a 220v supply into the 110v socket and 

 

If  power  is  fed  to  the  transformer  then  both  sockets  become  live  and  there  is  a  high  risk  of  somebody  being 
electrocuted. 

2 

Incompatible Threads on the bell Onboard Gas Bottles 

We have received a report from a diving support vessel (DSV) that during the re certification and testing of the bell onboard 
gas bottles, it was found that the pillar valves were incompatible with the threads on the bottles.  The bottles were W28.8 x 
1¼” according to DIN 477.  The pillar valves were ¾” NPT. 

Since  it  is  understood  that  this  re-certification  was  done  in the  past by  a  third  party  test  house,  contractors  may  wish  to 
examine their own worksites to check that they do not have a similar problem 

