SAFETY FLASH 

 June 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1  USCG: The Role of Main Propulsion Lube Oil System in the Loss of the El Faro 

The  United  States  Coast  Guard  (USCG)  has  distributed  Marine  Safety 
Alert 04-18 “Compliance with SOLAS and USCG Regulations for Operation 
of Main Propulsion and Essential Auxiliary Machinery: Lessons Learned 
from the SS El Faro Casualty,” in order to inform operators of the role 
that the main propulsion lube oil system was found to have played in the 
El Faro casualty, in which 33 lives were lost.  This alert also recommends 
that  operators,  especially  ship  engineers,  review  the  operational 
procedures  and  limitations  of  vital  propulsion  machinery,  and  verify 
compliance  with  International Convention for the Safety of Life at  Sea 
(SOLAS), Classification Society and regulatory standards. 

The  USCG  Marine  Board Report on the  sinking of the  El Faro revealed 
that  the  loss  of  propulsion  during  extremely  heavy  weather  was  a 
contributing factor to the sinking of the vessel.   The exact operational 
status  of  all  vital  El  Faro  engineering  equipment  during  the  hours 
preceding the casualty could not be determined.  However, bridge audio 
recordings  indicated  that  the  vessel  lost  lube  oil  pressure  to  the  main 
propulsion  turbine  and  reduction  gear  bearings,  resulting  in  loss  of 
propulsion.  It is believed that the vessel’s substantial list, coupled with 
trim by the bow, caused the main engine lube oil pump to lose suction.  
A  detailed  modelling  and  static  analysis  of  El  Faro’s  lube  oil  system 
determined that a severe inclination of the ship, coupled with a relatively 
low  volume  of  oil  in  the  sump,  would  likely  result  in  a  loss  of  pump 
suction.   

Figure 1 shows examples (at a constant lube oil volume) of the position 
of the suction bellmouth relative to the level of lube oil in the sump in 
several heel and trim conditions.  This static model does not attempt to 
address the sloshing of lube oil in the sump caused by vessel motions. 

The USCG Alert 04-18 can be seen here. 
 

 

2  Helicopter Navigation Experienced Magnetic Interference 

What happened? 

On  a  normal  (passenger)  crew  change  flight  in  an  AW169  helicopter,  crew  noticed  a  “1-2  AHRS  FAIL”  caution 
displayed in the crew alert system shortly after departure from the offshore installation.  With this caution message, 
electronic helicopter heading information was completely lost.   

Image: Wikipedia 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

 

 

After disembarking, the passengers were asked if they had any ferrous or magnetic parts in their luggage, which 
was initially denied.  After becoming aware of certain products possibly containing magnets, one of the passengers 
realized and admitted that he had two medium size stereo speakers in his luggage.  

The cause of the instrument failure was found to be due to the presence of magnetic elements (speakers) in the 
luggage hold. 

In bad weather conditions, navigation errors due to loss of orientation could have resulted in a far more serious 
outcome. 

What actions were taken? 

  The helicopter equipment involved in the occurrence was checked for damages and for correct function.  No 

damage nor discrepancies were found; the helicopter was released for service; 

  Check-in personnel now inform passengers that stereo speakers are not permitted on board helicopters; 

  Check-in  personnel  make  random  checks  of  passengers’  luggage  (as  approved  by  customer/passenger)  for 

items not to be transported onboard helicopters; 

What lessons were learned? 

  There  is  poor  awareness  amongst  helicopter  passengers  as  to  what  could  constitute  hazardous  goods; 

information on such potentially hazardous items needs to be made more readily available; 

  Offshore facilities (helicopter departure lounges) are not displaying adequate lists or images of items which are 

not permitted on board helicopters; this needs to be addressed and rectified. 

3  Unapproved Repair of Diver Gas Supply Umbilical 

What happened? 

A diver umbilical assembly was recently returned from a diving support vessel (DSV) to a shore-based workshop, as 
it was no longer required.  During the demobilisation of the umbilical assembly, it was noted that there had been a 
repair carried out on the diver gas supply hose.  Repairs to a diver gas supply umbilical are not considered good 
practice by our member and as a direct result the umbilical assembly was scrapped. 

The non-reclaim umbilical was 80m long and had been in service for approximately 5 years; the repair was located 
approximately 5 meters from the umbilical end.  The diver gas supply hose had a maximum working pressure of 
1000psi.   The  join  was  formed  by  standard  umbilical  end  fittings  with  6  JIC(F) swivels,  connected  by  a  6 JIC(M) 
adaptor.  The complete join was then covered with a layer of black heat shrink:  

 

 

Conclusion 

Our member noted that potential existed to trap sea water within the repaired section of the umbilical, resulting 
in an increased corrosion rate to the fittings forming the join.  No evidence of the repair was found in the planned 
maintenance system (PMS).  The failure of a diver umbilical could have potentially resulted in the loss of gas supply, 
activation of the secondary supply and the termination of the dive.  The worst-case scenario, though unlikely, could 
have resulted in serious injury or death.   

With this information now being circulated, it is hoped that all umbilical users will ensure that sufficient and correct 
information is made available to all applicable personnel.  Our member noted that subject to maintaining diving 
operations, repairs such as this may take place, but only until a permanent fix is implemented and subject to the 
completion of a risk assessment and full management approval. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Near miss involving diver’s neck dam [root cause identified: unauthorised maintenance] 

  Two near misses: loads fell from height to deck [investigation showed that unapproved changes had been made 

to the rigging. This was highlighted as a major contributing factor to the loads being dropped.] 

  Unauthorised modification to electrical plant equipment 

4  Accidental Drinking of Thinners Stored in Mineral Water Bottle 

What happened? 

A trainee ETO took a sip from a mineral water bottle in the engine room workshop.  It contained thinners rather 
than water.  The bottle was kept in the engine room workshop by third-party contractors.  After taking a swallow, 
he realized that it was thinners & immediately spat out most of the contents. 

He immediately drank salt water to induce vomiting in order to get any remaining thinner solution out of his system.  
The advice from the company doctor was that he consume plenty of fluids, eat light food and rest for a few days. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

 

Initial  investigation  revealed  that  the  third-party  contractors  working 
onboard had temporarily stored thinner in the mineral water bottle; 

  The third-party contractors were inadequately briefed and behaved  in 
an unsafe way – unsafe practice was used by the third-party contractors. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons learned were learned? 

Crew and third-party contractors were reminded to only store chemicals in 
proper,  appropriately  marked  containers.    Crew  were  recommended  to 
refrain from drinking water from  shared bottles in common places, and to 
carry their own bottle. 

IMCA notes that this was an entirely avoidable incident, but unfortunately a 
repeated scenario that other IMCA members have had to deal with in recent 
times.    Members  may  wish  to  make  a  particular  ‘safety  moment’  of  this 
incident and others of its type to prevent recurrence.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

  Unlabelled containers: chemicals stored in drinking water bottles (February 2017) 

  Near miss: water bottles reused for fuel storage (November 2017) 

5  Rodent Caused Short Circuiting of 440V Bus Bar 

What happened? 

A fire alarm was traced to the emergency generator room.  A rodent had found its way into an 
emergency switchboard cabinet, causing a 440V short  circuit, sparks and  a foul  smell.  The 
board was isolated and the dead rat was removed.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

This appears to be an isolated incident wherein the rodent had come on board during port 
stay, and gained access to the emergency generator room when the door was opened during 
routine weekly testing.  The vessel crew had not experienced the presence of rodents in recent 
months.    There  was  no  evidence  (rat  droppings)  found  anywhere  on  deck,  in  the 
accommodation or in the provision stores.  All the doors to accommodation and hatches were 
kept closed at all times.  Rat traps were in place at various locations.  

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  The  vessel  was  thoroughly  searched  for  rodents  in  accommodation,  the  stores  and  on  the  deck  after  the 

incident; nothing was found; 

  Rat traps remained in place on deck and in accommodation and stores, and the baits renewed; 

  During port stay, rat guards were to be used on moorings; 

  During the loading of provisions/cargo, crew were to be extra vigilant for presence of rodents. 

This incident appears to be unique in the IMCA safety flash database and for that reason is passed onto members.  

6  Recent prosecutions by the UK HSE 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (UK HSE) publishes regular press releases relating to safety incidents.  These can 
be found on the HSE website.  IMCA monitors these publications and passes on brief information relating to some 
of these incidents, from which members may draw lessons. 

Incident 1 – Worker crushed while unloading a vehicle 

A worker suffered crush injuries while unloading a vehicle from a visiting delivery lorry.  He was unchaining a vehicle 
ramp from a delivery lorry when the lorry moved forward with one chain still attached to the ramp, crushing the 
worker between the ramp and a barrier. 

Investigation by the UK HSE found that there was: 

  A failure to fully control the risks arising from the operation of vehicle loading and unloading ramps; 

  There were no suitably robust systems of work implemented;  

  There was insufficient training to allow workers to safely unload vehicles;  

  There was no briefing for visiting drivers to the worksite. 

The HSE inspector noted that something as simple as removing the visiting lorry driver’s keys until the procedure 
was safely completed was one method which could have prevented such an occurrence.   

The full press release can be found here. 

Incident 2 – Workers suffer serious burns in electrical flashover 

Two workers suffered serious burns from an electrical flashover.  They were working to reinstate the power supply 
to a furnace after repair work had been completed by contractors.  After replacing the fuses, they shut the door to 
the fuse panel which engaged the interlock and tried to close the main switch.  As this would not operate, they 
opened the panel door and decided to bypass the interlock using a screwdriver in order to try the main switch 
again.  At this point an electrical flashover occurred.  Both employees suffered serious skin burns requiring surgery 
followed by a two week stay in hospital to recover. 

An investigation carried out by the UK HSE found that: 

  There were no electrical safety rules, safe systems of work or a permit system in place; 

  There were no recorded systems or rules for working with electricity; 

  There was no assessment of risk and the injured employees were not provided with any specific instructions on 

  The company also allowed employees to work on live conductors without consideration of the conditions which 

how to undertake the work safely; 

are stipulated in [UK] law. 

The full press release can be found here. 

