AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/02 

October 2002 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Pipe Stacking Fatality 

The following incident occurred at an onshore fabrication facility, but provides an important reminder of areas that must be 
considered when planning for situations where loads and stacks have the potential to become unstable. 

A rigging crew, made up of one crane operator and two riggers, had been assigned to removal several 24-inch diameter steel 
tubulars from a random stack in a warehouse stock yard.  The pipes had been stacked and chocked to be no more than three 
layers high.  During the operation, a tubular in the middle of the bottom layer needed to be retrieved.  To gain access, the 
crew began rearranging the other tubulars.  The two riggers were positioned on each end of the stack to assist the crane 
operator with hook-up and to guide the tubulars out using tag lines. 

When the required tubular had been removed, it left an open slot with two unstable stacks either side of it.  For reasons that 
cannot be verified, one of the riggers then stepped into the slot – it is believed he was either placing chocks or following the 
tag line on the tubular just removed from the slot.   

While his foot was in the slot, the force of a tubular on the second row pushed down, causing the tubular to one side of the 
slot to roll into the slot.  The rigger was caught between the two pipes and received severe crushing injuries to his pelvic 
area.  He was transported to the local hospital, but later died from the injuries he had sustained. 

The following investigation identified the following areas for concern: 

  The warehouse stockyard, not being an area of regular production activity, had not been regularly inspected to ensure 

the proper storage of tubulars; 

  On the day of the incident, the entire rigging crew, including those involved in this incident, had met to conduct a pre-
shift ‘toolbox talk’ meeting and job safety analysis (JSA), but the JSA had only covered work being done at a project site 
in another part of the yard, which at the time had been considered a higher risk – this task had been considered routine; 

  Best industry practice is to remove all pipe from upper layers before removing a tubular from the bottom.  This had not 

been routine at the yard prior to this incident. 

 

 

 

Safety Flash 

 

The company involved has noted the following action points resulting from its investigations: 

  All areas are to ensure that detailed rigging procedures, coupled with a comprehensive rigging training programme, are 

developed and implemented, to cover best industry practices of handling, stacking and storage of materials; 

  Existing  field  safety  assessment  programmes  are  to  be  reviewed  to  ensure  all  areas  of  the  yard  (and  of  vessels)  are 

covered, including non-production areas such as warehouses and stock yards; 

  All  areas  are to  ensure,  through proper training,  that  employees  (particularly  supervisors)  know  how  to  conduct task 
risk assessments/JSAs for all of their daily jobs, including inspections of work areas as part of the JSA and identification of 
adequate controls for lowering risk to as low as reasonably practicable; 

  Each  area’s  management  is  to  stress  to  its  employees  the  company’s  expectations  that  any  unsafe  work  be  stopped 

immediately. 

2  Dangers from Insecure Crane Loads 

This crane incident also occurred onshore, but the lessons to be learnt are equally applicable to members’ lifting operations. 

During a major turn-around, fan tubes were being lifted using a tube tray.  During the lift and while the tube tray was directly 
over the crane operator’s cab, the tube tray deviated from horizontal, causing the fan tubes to slide off.  They plunged like 
arrows  into  the  operator’s  cab,  piercing  the  back  and  seat  of  the  operator’s  chair.    Amazingly  the  operator  suffered  only 
minor scratches to one leg. 

This  is  a  reminder  that  all  ‘lifts’  must  be  taken  seriously,  from  the  lightest  and  least  complex  to  the  heaviest  and  most 
complex.  Proper rigging and securing of loads is of vital importance and saves lives. 

3  Securing of Office Equipment on Vessels 

A member has reported the following incident which occurred onboard one of its vessels. The vessel was in heavy seas when 
it was hit by several 20-25’ swells, causing the vessel to heel over to 35°.  This resulted in serious disruption throughout the 
accommodation  areas,  with  the  Office  being  among  the  worst  effected.    While  an  employee  tried  to  prevent  a  computer 
from falling off of a desk, he was hit by filing cabinets and a photocopier which had broken loose from the opposite side of 
the Office.  He turned to protect himself, but was struck on the chin by one of the cabinets, resulting in a minor laceration 
and also in jarring to the chin. 

The  company  involved  has  issued  a  reminder  of  the  importance  of  ensuring  all  fittings,  items  and  equipment  in 
accommodation areas and on deck are sufficiently secured to prevent movement in heavy weather, thereby minimising the 
risk of injury to personnel and/or damage to equipment. 

4  Near Miss – Broken High Pressure Oxygen Fitting 

A member has reported that while recovering an inflated lift bag over the bow bulwarks on one of its vessels, a regulator 
attached to an oxygen pack was broken off at the bottle nipple on the high pressure side of the regulator.  The king valve was 
quickly closed and there was no harm to personnel or equipment.  Nevertheless, the potential hazard from a high pressure 
oxygen escape is obvious. 

In  its  investigations,  the  company  noted  that  the  regulator  and  associated  piping  and  hose  had  extended  beyond  the 
framework of the oxygen pack and into the work area. 

The company has issued the following recommendations as a result of its investigations: 

  Ensure  fittings  used  are  suitable  for  the  task  involved.    Where  such  fittings  extend  the  overall  length  before  the 

regulator, they add leverage and therefore increase the likelihood of breakage; 

  Plumb  in  such  a  way  that  the  regulator,  its  associated  fittings,  gauges  and  hose  reside  within  protective  framework  – 
ideally that  of the bottle  rack  or  quad  skid.    An  appropriately  rated brass  pipe  street elbow  should be  used  after the 
bottle nipple if necessary, to keep the regulator and fittings within the protective framing; 

  Wherever possible, bottle racks and quad skids should be positioned in such a way that regulators are away from work 

areas and walkways; 

 

If high pressure bottles must be located in a work area, it must be ensured that job safety analyses associated with the 
tasks in that area include the potential hazards associated with working around high pressure bottles. 

