AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/16 

Safety Flash 

 March 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

Focus – Mosquito-Borne Diseases 

A recent fatality from malaria focuses our attention once again on mosquito-borne diseases of all kinds.  In light of 
this fatality, we will also share information on the Zika virus which may be of use and interest to members. 

Further useful information:  

  A handy PDF poster on Mosquito bite prevention for travelers, prepared by the United States’ Center for Disease 
in  entirety  as  part  of  this  safety  flash  – 

Control  &  Prevention 
www.cdc.gov/chikungunya/pdfs/fs_mosquito_bite_prevention_travelers.pdf; 

is  reproduced 

(CDC). 

  This 

 

Information from the CDC on mosquito borne diseases – www.cdc.gov/features/stopmosquitoes/; 

  Vector-borne  disease  management  programmes:  A  guide  for  managers  and  supervisors  in  the  oil  and  gas 

industry – www.ogp.org.uk/pubs/481.pdf. 

1  Malaria Fatality 

Why did it happen? 

An  incidence  of  malaria  fatality  has  been  brought  to  IMCA’s  attention.    The  incident  occurred  offshore  Ghana.  
A non-immune foreign national contractor presented himself to the offshore medic with flu-like symptoms.  He 
tested  negative  for  malaria  twice  via  rapid  diagnostic  testing.    He  was  sent  ashore  for  further  evaluation  and 
subsequently died as a result of complications arising from malaria. 

  Mosquito bite prevention measures were not taken (e.g. repellent, long-sleeved clothing); 

  Malarial prevention drugs (prophylaxis) were not taken (e.g. Malarone, Doxycycline); 

  Malaria was not diagnosed early and as a result the deceased did not receive the necessary medical treatment 

in a timely way. 

The following points were reiterated: 

  The importance of refresher training in malaria management for all relevant personnel; 

  The importance of seeking early treatment; 

  The correct and timely use of rapid reaction diagnostic kits; 

  The following World Health Organization (WHO) “ABCD” approach to Malaria management will be helpful: 

  A is for Awareness 
  B is for Bite prevention 
  C is for Chemoprophylaxis 
  D is for Diagnosis - early diagnosis. 

 
2 

The Zika Virus 

Zika is a disease caused by the Zika virus – it is spread to people primarily through the bite of an infected Aedes 
species mosquito. 

Symptoms – about 1 in 5 people infected with Zika will get sick.  For people who get sick, the illness is usually mild.  
For this reason, many people might not realise that they have been infected.  The most common symptoms of the 
Zika virus disease are fever, rash, joint pain, or conjunctivitis (red eyes).  Symptoms typically begin 2 to 7 days after 
being bitten by an infected mosquito.  The illness is usually mild with symptoms lasting from several days to a week. 

Transmission  –  the  Zika  virus  is  transmitted  to  people  primarily  through  the  bite  of  an  infected  Aedes  species 
mosquito.  These are the same mosquitoes that spread Dengue and Chikungunya viruses.  These mosquitoes are 
aggressive daytime biters, but they can also bite at night.  Mosquitoes become infected when they bite a person 
already  infected  with  the  virus.    Infected  mosquitoes  can  then  spread  the  virus  to  other  people  through  bites.  
Spreading of the virus through blood transfusion and sexual contact have also been reported. 

At risk areas – currently, South America is seeing a large outbreak of the Zika virus infection, with Brazil reporting 
the largest outbreak – estimated at over 1 million infections in 2015.  Within South East Asia, sporadic cases of the 
Zika virus have been detected from Cambodia, Indonesia, Philippines, East Malaysia and Thailand in recent years. 

The control measures are as follows: 

  Reduce the risk of importation of the Zika virus – travellers to countries with the Zika virus infection are advised 

to protect themselves from mosquito bites; 

  Facilitate  early  detection  of  cases  –  returning  travellers  from  affected  areas  are  advised  to  seek  medical 
attention if they develop symptoms of Zika such as fever, skin rashes, joint and muscle pains, headaches and 
red eyes; 

  Contain the  spread of Zika virus infection  –  confirmed cases will be  admitted to a public hospital until they 
recover and test negative for the virus.  Admitting them into a single room at the hospital will also minimise 
their  risk  of  being  bitten  by mosquitoes  while  they  are  carrying  the  virus,  which  may  result  in  further  local 
transmission. 

Further information: 

  Travellers to countries with local transmission of the Zika virus should take precautions and protect themselves 

from mosquito bites by: 
  Wearing long sleeves, long trousers and/or appropriate covering clothing 
  Applying insect-repellent 
  Sleeping under mosquito nets or in rooms with wire-mesh screens to keep out mosquitoes. 

If  travellers  to  such  countries  become  unwell,  they  should  seek  medical  attention  promptly.    Pregnant  women 
should reconsider their travel plans to countries with ongoing outbreaks and local transmission. 

Travellers who have returned from affected areas should monitor their health for the next 14 days and consult a 
doctor if they have any symptoms of Zika, such as fever, skin rashes, joint and muscle pains, headaches and red 
eyes.  They should inform the doctor of the areas that they have travelled to. 

In  countries  where  mosquitos  are  an  on-going  problem,  the  following  “5-step  Mozzie  Wipeout”  has  proved 
worthwhile:  

1.  Changing water in vases and bowls on alternate days; 

2.  Removing water from flower pot plates on alternate days; 

3.  Turning over all water storage containers; 

4.  Covering bamboo pole holders when not in use;  

5.  Keeping gutters clear from blockages and using appropriate insecticide in roof gutters monthly. 

 

 

 

 

