SAFETY FLASH 

IMCA Safety Flash 28/18 

 December 2018 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

LTI: Severe Burn from Short Circuited Li-Ion Battery  

What happened? 

A crew member suffered severe burns when a Lithium-Ion battery on his person exploded and caught fire.  The 
crew member was about to do the last task of the shift.  He picked up a set of keys and a spare battery for his 
vaporizer from the table and put them in his pocket.  He heard a loud bang and surprised, looked around to see the 
origin of the sound, and only then finding out that he was on fire.  A motorman working nearby came to his aid and 
together they managed to get his boiler suit off.  They saw the burning battery on the deck and stamped out the 
fire.  Further assistance was called, and first aid was applied.  The injured person was medevac’d shortly after to a 
shore-based  hospital,  where  he  was  treated  for  10  days  before  being  repatriated  to  his  home  and  undergoing 
further treatment. 

What was the cause? 

The metal keys created a short circuit with the battery.  Carrying the battery in his pocket with the keys enabled 
the keys to provoke a ‘thermal runaway’ by either puncturing the outer shield or by making a connection between 
the plus and minus layers; the exact cause could not be determined conclusively. 

The exploded battery and 
the one it was supposed 

to replace if required. 

 

 

The keys that caused the 

short circuit 

 

 

The pocket – burnt 

through 

The burn – which was 
classed both 2nd and 3rd 
degree – temperatures 

estimated at 

approximately 1000 °C 

 

 

What went wrong? 

The crewman was carrying the Li-Ion battery loose in his pocket together with metal keys.  This caused a short 
circuit of the battery and initiated a ‘thermal runaway’, which caused the battery to burst explode into flames. 

When  he  picked  up  his  belongings,  he  stated  that  he  was  not  even  aware  of  the  battery  being  amongst  his 
belongings, he just scooped it all into his pocket. 

Our member noted that the following: 

  There was no box used for carrying the Li-Ion battery; 

  The  safety  warning  provided  was  only  the  one  actually  written  on  the  battery.    No  information  had  been 

provided by the supplier of the equipment of which the battery was a part. 

Actions taken, and lessons learned 

Lithium-Ion batteries, which are more and more common in devices used onboard, are not controlled properly and 
it cannot always be expected that the proper and correct information has been provided by the supplier.  

Lithium-Ion batteries sometimes come in size and design similar to ‘AA’ sized batteries and as such can be easily 
confused with a normal alkaline battery, and thus the risk associated is also confused. 

Our member prohibited the carrying of loose Lithium-Ion batteries whilst at work, added appropriate issues and 
precautions to the vessel induction information displayed onboard, and ensured that a check was made by stewards 
during cleaning of cabins in order to identify batteries being charged unattended. 

Members are recommended to: 

  Ensure that all persons are properly informed about the hazards associated with Lithium-Ion batteries.  This 
should include the charging, handling and storage and the risk associated with carrying the batteries loose in 
pockets; 

  Consider more thorough control of small personal electronic devices using Lithium-Ion batteries. 

Members should review the following incidents: 

  Fire in the accommodation: electronic items in cabins 

 

Laptop Battery Fire (October 2017) 

  Fire in vessel accommodation – overheating notebook computer (September 2016) 

  Mobile Phone Charger Failures (June 2016) 

2  UK HSE: Worker Suffers Life-Changing Crush Injuries – Rotating Machine 

The UK Health and Safety Executive (UK HSE) have prosecuted a printing company after an employee suffered life-
changing crush injuries whilst cleaning rotating machinery.  

The injured person sustained the crush injury whilst cleaning a rotating roller on a production line.  The cloth that 
the worker was using got caught in the machine, and the worker was drawn into the rollers.  The incident resulted 
in the employee having the middle finger of the right-hand amputated; two other fingers were fractured and there 
was some degloving of the skin.  

HSE investigation revealed that the company had not adequately guarded the rotating rollers, which would have 
prevented access to the dangerous parts of the machinery.  The UK HSE noted that “This injury could have been 
easily prevented, and the risk should have been identified. Employers should make sure they properly assess and 
apply effective control measure like suitable guards, to minimise the risk from dangerous parts of machinery”. 

3  MSF: Two LTIs – A Slip and a Fall, and Trapping a Thumb  

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) have recently released two safety alerts relating to lost time injuries (LTIs).  These 
are Safety Alert 18-27 and Safety Alert 18-24. 

Incident 1: fractured toe 

A crew member was going to a lower deck using an external stairway.  He was holding a bucket in one hand and 
holding the handrail with the other.  As he descended the staircase, his foot slipped off the step, causing him to fall.  
In order to prevent further slipping down the remaining steps, he put his left foot in the space between the upright 
stanchions to break the falling motion, and as a result broke his toe.  

The weather conditions were dry, and the vessels’ movement was not excessive.  The injured person was wearing 
appropriate footwear.   

 

 

 

Why did it happen?  What were the causes? 

The MSF notes that the only potential problem could have been an ineffective grip on the steps; the vessel had the 
standard perforated steps found on many vessels, however, there was no additional anti-slip grip strip. 

What actions were taken? 

or worn – check it is still effective; 

  Check that the anti-slip design or measures remain fit for purpose, and that they have not been painted over 

  During wet weather or when decks and surfaces are wet, particular care should be taken to use the ‘trailing 

hand’ technique or the ‘one hand for the ship and one for yourself’; 

  Always wear appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE).  

Incident two – squeezed thumb 

A crew member was opening a watertight door into the bow thruster room.  As he placed his hand on the operating 
handle, he placed the other hand on the watertight door framework opposite.  As the door opened, his thumb was 
squeezed between the frame plating and the door housing.  

What happened? 

The  injured  person  placed  his  hand  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  door  to  steady  himself,  just  in  case  of  vessel 
movement.  However, the framework provides a flat surface and is easily mistaken as a ‘safe spot’ to place a hand 
when operating the operating lever.  

 

 

 

What actions were taken? 

  Ensure all new crew members undertake a familiarisation tour of the vessel, effectively highlighting potential 

hazards (particularly, moving machinery, stored energy situations and equipment etc.);  

  Encourage crew members to ask questions if any task or part of their role is not understood; 

  All new crewmembers onboard should be supervised  –  this is key in providing trainees with a safe working 

environment.  All supervisors are encouraged to ensure close mentoring and supervision; 

  Highlight hazards surrounding the weather tight and watertight doors onboard;  

  Add hazard markings to the door frame (as demonstrated in the above photos); 

  Concentrate on the task at hand – concentration is vital in ensuring every crew member departs the vessel in 

the same condition they joined.  

 Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Badly sprained ankle resulting in LTI 

LTI: Hand injury resulting from clothing catching on door 

 

 

Lost time injury (LTI) to leg 

4 

Suspected Case of Legionella Onboard Vessel  

What happened? 

Two  cases  of  “acute  pneumonia  in  severe  form”  were  identified  on  a  survey  vessel  with  42  persons  onboard, 
including crew and client’s representatives.  The client’s health team assumed it to be a case of Legionella.  The 
vessel went into port and both affected personnel were evacuated and sent to a medical clinic for examination.   

What were the causes? 

Legionella infection is caused when bacteria gains entry into the respiratory system.  This can occur from water 
suspended in air in the form of a fine mist as created by showers or tap sprays.  

Well maintained water tanks, pipe work, pumps and hoses, along with good water management practices can help 
control the legionella bacteria.    

Corrective Actions 

 

Legionella and throat culture tests were arranged for all personnel onboard; 

  Swab tests were taken from the ventilation systems in the cabins of the two affected personnel; 

  Deep cleaning of all vessel cabins and washing and cleaning of all ventilation air grates (as well as pipes); 

  Appropriate cleaning chemicals were passed through the ventilation system by a specialized contractor so that 

air flow could assist in the disinfection process.  Treatment of portable water tanks was arranged also; 

  Arranged appropriate cleaning/chlorination of cabin shower heads at quarterly intervals. 

Medical test reports later confirmed that:  

  The two persons were not infected with Legionella.  They were diagnosed with acute respiratory infection and 

appropriate medicines prescribed; 

  There were no signs of Legionella disease confirmed onboard. 

Members may wish to review the following: 

  Staphylococcal Infection in deep water saturation dive to 200 metres (2004) 

  Two cases of contaminated drinking water 

  Guidance on occupational health (IMCA SEL 033) 

Members can search the IMCA catalogue for further LTI related incidents by using the search bar on our safety flash 
webpage: 

 

5 

Sharp Wire: Injury During Routine Maintenance  

What happened? 

Whilst conducting routine engine maintenance a seafarer caught his arm on a 
sharp piece of wire, causing the need for medical treatment.  The seafarer was 
using a spanner to tighten bolts connected to the main engine exhaust system 
where  a  piece  of  sharp  reinforcing  wire  was  protruding  from  some  nearby 
flexible  hose.    The  spanner  slipped,  causing  the  seafarers  arm  to  forcefully 
come into contact with the wire resulting in a cut requiring medical treatment. 

The  seafarer  visited  a  shore-side  hospital  for  medical  treatment.    After 
receiving stitches, he was able to return to work.  

What was the cause? 

The sharp reinforcing wire was sticking out and should not have been. 

What lessons were learned? 

Before conducting the routine maintenance, a simple check would have highlighted the sharp wire.  The seafarer 
could then have either removed the wire or, if not possible, bent it back or covered it so as not to cause any harm. 

This highlights the need for thorough pre-maintenance checks to prevent or control the potential for unnecessary 
maintenance related injury.  

Members  may  wish  to  refer  to  these  injuries  with  the  same  immediate  cause  –  unexpected,  undetected  and 
inappropriate sharp edges in the workplace: 

 

LTI: Cut To Hand From Protruding Hose Clip  

  Two Recent Cases Of Hand And Arm Injuries  

 

