SAFETY FLASH 

 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 25/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Finger Injury: Diver Caught Finger in Bell Door  

What happened? 

A diver suffered an injury when his finger got caught between 
the top of the bell door and the retaining latch.  The incident 
occurred at the end of the dive, when both divers had been 
recovered  to  the  bell  and  were  preparing  for  return  to 
surface.    The  dive  team  were  attempting  to  close  the  bell 
door;  however,  the  racked  umbilical  was  stopping  the  door 
from fully closing.  Diver 1 placed his hand on top of the door 
and leant onto it to steady himself as he tried to reposition 
the  umbilical.    At  that  point,  the  door  moved  back  slightly, 
pinching  his  finger  between  the  top  of  the  door  and  the 
retaining latch.  He suffered a deep cut to his finger which lead 
to him being decompressed from the system as a precaution 
against possible infection.  

What went wrong? 

The investigation for this incident highlighted a number of contributory factors: 

Incorrectly stored umbilical interfering with the closing of the bell door; 

Lack of awareness/perception of risk; 

Lack of hazard markings on the pinch point location. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  There  needs  to  be  a  thorough  check  of  work  areas  for  potential  pinch  points,  and  where  these  cannot  be 
removed,  ensure  that  they  are  physically  highlighted  and  identified  in  task  risk  assessments  (TRAs),  and 
communicated to all personnel during toolbox talks (TBTs); 

  There was a review of equipment stowage in the bell, which resulted in the repositioning of the bell scrubber, 

improved stowage of rebreather and repositioning of divers’ seats within the bell.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Finger injury: pinch point [the exact same immediate cause] 

Line of fire (‘Be prepared to work safely’ video) 

In the line of fire (IMCA SEL 036, video) 

 

 

 

 

 

Incidents  relating  to  the  failure  of  bell  door  components  have  not  been  included  here.    Please  see 
https://www.imca-int.com/alerts/search-safety-flash/?swpquery=hand+pinch for a wider and deeper selection of 
incidents relating to pinch points and hands.  Please remember that safety flashes can be searched for any word.  
Browse to https://www.imca-int.com/alerts/safety-flash/ and type here: 

2  Near Miss: Unplanned Deployment of PLET Outrigger 

What happened? 

As a pipeline end termination (PLET) passed through the firing line, a rigger incorrectly cut a webbed ratchet strap 
(instead of a 6mm rope lanyard) which was restraining the aft PLET outriggers/stabilizer legs in the upright position.  
After cutting the ratchet strap, the starboard stabilizer leg deployed to approximately 35 degrees from vertical, 
coming to rest on the pipeline induction heat (PIH), injection moulded poly propylene (IMPP) unit.  The port side 
outrigger released (approximately 60 degrees from vertical) until it came to rest on a nearby handrail.  

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

position; 

changed to a flat ratchet strap; 

  Engineering  design:  there  was  no  integral  mechanical  means  to  lock  or  hold  the  outriggers  in  the  vertical 

  Management  of  change  (MoC):  original  drawings  indicated  a  wire  rope  sling  arrangement  which  was  later 

  A risk assessment did not identify the potential stored energy hazard posed by the outriggers; 

  Communication: a decision was made to introduce 6mm rope to the ratchet strap to allow for easy retrieval 
subsea  with  an ROV.   This decision was made informally and intermittently conveyed between teams (field 
engineers and rigging), which introduced a new risk. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Reviewed risk management process for the design of subsea structures to make the process more robust and 

to allow the project team to analyse structure designs and address all failure points during the design phase; 

  Ensure changes to designs as supplied by a customer are managed robustly with justification documented for 

any engineered changes in rigging arrangements – a more robust MoC; 

  Thorough review of risk management  processes, particularly between teams and in the ‘interface’ between 

teams; in this case, between the fabrication and project teams; 

  Reinforced  the  importance  of  clear  communication  during  critical  operations,  to  ensure  the  message/work 

scope is delivered in a clear manner and that any risks are fully understood by the crews. 

 

3 

LTI: Finger Injury During Lifting Operations 

What happened? 

A crewman suffered a serious hand injury whilst working on subsea 
mattress recovery using a quick release mattress handling beam.  The 
lifting  webbing  slings  and  ROV  hooks  were  disconnected  from  the 
mattress  and then,  whilst  reconnecting  the  beam,  two of  the  pins 
failed to fully engage due to the slings being caught by the pins.  The 
crewman was in the process of freeing the sling, when another deck 
crew member operated the quick release bar, which re-engaged the 
pin, resulting in trapping the injured person’s finger.   

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Our member notes that this incident took place during the hours of 
darkness, and records the following reasons for occurrence: 

  The design of the pin engagement mechanism and the width of 

the slings; 

  On  this  occasion  there  was  a  breakdown  in  communication 
between  the  deck  crew  members;  the  injured  person  was  not 
clear of the pins when the mechanism was re-engaged. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Our member suggested that when involved in mattress deployment 
and recovery using a quick release mattress handling beam, confirm and verify that: 

  The task plans and task risk assessments clearly define the roles and responsibilities of the deck team involved 
in the operation, and that mitigation for entrapment hazards is fully understood, including nominating a person 
to control and operate the handling beam quick release bar; 

  Consideration is given to attaching rope grommets or tie wraps to the end of the slings to help keep the sling 

in place when engaging the pins and to keep fingers out of line of fire; 

  There is a clear and defined sequence of operation and communications protocol addressing what commands 

are to be called, when and by whom.  Communication and commands to include: 

 

 

the use of an ‘all clear’ command and a confirmation that all personnel are clear, prior to activation and 
operation of the quick release bar 

the use of a ‘worksite is safe’ command when it is safe to connect/re-connect slings to the beam; 

  There is a ‘run through’ and a test of the communications protocol takes place with all personnel involved in 

the task during pre-job TBTs, shift handovers and when there is a change of crew. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

Line of Fire LTI: finger injury during lifting operations 

Lack of safety awareness: crush injury during lifting operations 

 

 

  Hand Injury 

4 

Injury Sustained During Manual Handling of Sharp Object 

What happened? 

A crew member injured his leg while moving a mud agitator with unprotected blades.  At the time of incident, the 
vessel was proceeding to port.  First aid was administered immediately on-board, followed by further examination 
and treatment of the wound at a clinic onshore.  The injured person returned to the vessel on the same day. 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  There  was  inadequate  risk  awareness  –  risks  could  have  been  reduced  by  protecting  the  blades  before 
lifting/handling the agitator; waiting until the vessel reached port could also have reduced manual handling 
risks; 

  Manual handling practice could have been improved – while the agitator was suspended by chain blocks during 
the work, whilst gripping the blades using pieces of rags (rather than wearing gloves), the load slipped from his 
hands  and  hit  the  crew  members’  leg.    A  rope  or  another  hands-off  approach  could  have  been  used  to 
turn/move/stabilise the load. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Better risk awareness when moving objects with blades or sharp edges: 

  protect the sharp edges 
  arrange lifting and moving of load without actual manual handling – ropes, tag lines etc 
  wait until more personnel are available and/or vessel is in port (as appropriate) 
  use proper personal protective equipment (PPE) – gloves. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Crewman suffers cut to hand – but gloves prevented it being much worse 

  Two recent cases of hand and arm injuries 

  Watch your hands (‘Be prepared to work safely’ video) 

