 

Safety Alert 07 

Hydrocarbon Gas Release Incident 

 
 
What happened? 
A recent hydrocarbon gas release incident, discovered following a cyclone, has highlighted 
issues associated with maintenance and testing of inaccessible components of offshore 
platforms, and preparation for response to potential emergencies. 

The gas release occurred from a gas lift riser pipe within the riser caisson on the platform 
after being shut-in in preparation for an approaching cyclone.  On return to the field, after 
the cyclone had passed, the gas line between two nearby platforms was found to have 
depressurised. 

A gas compressor was subsequently started to commence a re-start of offshore wells and 
platforms.  Personnel were mobilised to the offshore platforms to manually open valves to 
bring a well back on line. 

Upon arrival at one of the platforms, personnel noticed the sound of gas passing and went 
to investigate.  The crew found a gas leak inside the gas riser caisson and left the valves 
shut-in before travelling back to another platform to isolate valves supplying the gas riser. 

The gas line pressure was bled to a flowline, with residual pressure released from the line 
through a vent boom.  There were no resultant damage-causing events or injuries. 

 
 
What went wrong? 
The gas release was found to have occurred from a corroded section of riser above the 
water-line which was not accessible to internal or external inspection.  The investigation 
found that there were no inspection hatches on the caisson, and the diameter of this 
section of the gas riser was too small to allow intelligent pigging.  As the design of the 
facility did not readily facilitate inspection, testing and maintenance of this particular section 
of pipe, the ongoing integrity of the riser could not be ensured. 

Contributing factors to the incident included: 

Pipeline coating system deterioration and subsequent failure; 

Incomplete inspection and testing regime; and 

Failure to follow-up on lack of condition monitoring of a small section of gas riser. 

 

• 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NOPSA SAFETY ALERT 07 cont’d 
 
Key lessons 
•  Operators should ensure that inspection program results include a specific gap 
analysis commentary, in order to highlight any latent defects in inspection and 
maintenance regimes of safety-critical items and equipment. 

•  Operators should ensure that equipment is designed to provide adequate access for 

inspection & maintenance. 

• 

Hazard identification should be conducted and appropriate precautions taken prior to 
responding to a potential gas release event.  It is important to recognise that when 
responding to a potential gas release, the response to the initiating event can also 
contribute to harm to people. 

 
 
 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 07 
 

