 

 

 

Safety Alert 03 

Compressor Overpressure Incident – Near Miss 

 

What happened? 

Following  routine  maintenance  at  a  processing  facility,  the  first  and  second  stages  of  a 
compressor were severely over-pressurised during de-isolation.  In the ensuing efforts to rectify 
the situation, operations personnel were exposed to a risk of a catastrophic failure of equipment 
and being enveloped by a gas cloud. 

What went wrong? 

During maintenance work the compressor was isolated from a common gas export header via a 
double  block  and  bleed  arrangement.    The  bleed  line  had  been  used  to  depressurise  the 
compressor  prior  to  the  high  pressure  flare  header  being  isolated.    Following  maintenance,  the 
de-isolation  process  was  commenced  by  opening  the  valve  to  the  gas  export  header  without 
realising the bleed valve was still open.  As a result, the pressure increased along the pipework 
downstream  of  the  pressure  safety  valve  up  to  the  isolating  valve  on  the  flare  header.    At  the 
same time, gas flowed through the blow-down and recycle valves to the first, second and third 
inlet sections of the compressor, which were open following de-energisation of the system.  This 
was partly due to pipework modifications made in the 1990’s which allowed high pressure gas to 
back-flow into the low pressure first stage suction side of the compressor. 

The valve isolating the high pressure flare header was then opened slightly and an unexpected 
gas  flow  was  noticed  that  started  to  ice  up  this  valve.    During  the  process  of  investigating  the 
unexpected process conditions, a request to undertake another task was received.  Before leaving 
the compressor area to undertake this new task, the valve flare header valve was closed, allowing 
the  pressure  to  continue  building  up  at  the  compressor  inlet.    Before  the  de-isolation  process 
could  be  resumed,  a  flange  and  a  seal  on  the  compressor  burst  resulting  in  a  gas  leak,  and 
triggering a gas alarm and plant trip. 

Due  to  concern  about  the  icing  up  of  the  flare  header  valve,  three  operators  proceeded  to  the 
compressor  and  vented  the  pressure  through  scrubber  vents.    The  first  stage  scrubber  was 
pressurised  to  almost  four  times  its  normal  operating  pressure  so  that  a  catastrophic  failure  of 
equipment and associated rapid release of a gas cloud could have resulted. 

Factors which contributed to the incident included: 

• 

• 

• 

The work was considered routine and although isolation points were listed on an isolation 
certificate,  there  was  no  sequencing  for  valve  opening  and  closure  and  no  independently 
verified procedures for the isolation and de-isolation process. 

Isolation of the flare header from pressure safety valves was an accepted practice for this 
type of work. 

Operations  had  not  been  planned  to  take  for  account  of  all  activities  and  available 
personnel. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

The specific role of each valve was not well understood. 

There was a modification to the compressor manifold skid piping, undertaken in the 1990’s 
which  increased  the  risk  of  this  event  by  creating  the  capability  of  interconnecting  low 
pressure and high pressure flare headers. 

There were no pressure alarms on the interstage vessels, which may have alerted personnel 
to the overpressure danger. 

Recovery of the situation was not conducted from a position of safety. 

Key lessons: 

Operations  should  be  planned  to  ensure  that  adequate  resources  are  made  available  to 
undertake the work safely. 

Standard procedures for conducting isolation and de-isolation activities should be in place 
and independently verified, and personnel should be trained and competent in their use. 

•  Work which involves isolation of equipment from relief systems should be avoided where 
possible,  except  where  pressure  in  the  system  has  been  reduced  to,  and  maintained  at, 
sufficiently low levels to minimise the risk. 

Training should be conducted to ensure that personnel can recognise the hazards from over-
pressurisation  and  gas  releases,  and  to  ensure  that  in  the  event  of  an  incident,  the 
coordination of recovery activities is conducted from a position of safety. 

Any  changes  to  plant,  such  as  the  interconnection  between  the  high  pressure  and  low 
pressure  flare  headers,  should  be  properly  reviewed  under  the  Management  of  Change 
system. 

