 

 

SAFETY ALERT 01 
Man-riding near miss 

 

What happened? 
An offshore drilling operation stalled when a control system was inadvertently activated.  A man 
was hoisted in a harness to release the elevators.  When the man landed on the rig floor the 
travelling block was then lowered.  The man was removing the harness when the block fouled 
the harness line, which was itself fouled over the racking fingers.  The man was lifted off the 
ground towards the monkey board before the block was stopped.  Interviews revealed that the 
man-riding activity in this case was under the controls stated in a permit that was issued for an 
earlier unrelated activity.  The incident had clear fatality potential as the man was raised in 
excess of 4 metres. 
 
Key Lessons 
Man-riding is an inherently risky activity and appropriate risk management processes should be 
used to reduce the risk. 
Blanket permits are inappropriate to control inherently risky activities such as man-riding. 
Man-riding was conducted in this instance when other options were available that would not 
expose a person to the potential to be harmed. 
Man-riding hoists have traditionally been controlled manually.  It is possible to install simple, 
effective hard barriers to remove the likelihood of human error in controlling this type of activity.  
Risk assessment must target specific tasks or activities to be effective. 
 
Recommendations 
Man riding is an inherently risky operation that should only be performed if no other options are 
available. 
It is recommended that operators conduct risk assessments of current systems and include hard 
barriers to reduce risk, such as locks or automatic controls where appropriate. 
Man-riding activities should be planned, supervised and closed-out individually. 
Blanket permits should not be used to control man-riding activities. 
The use of best practice guidance such as “Step Change for Safety” publication “Best Practice 
Guide to Man-riding Safety” is recommended. (http://stepchangeinsafety.net/) 
 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 01. 

