Safety Alert 53

November 2012

Food Safety

What Happened?

A recent outbreak of  salmonella  and gastroenteritis on  an  offshore  facility  resulted  in about 40 members of 
the  workforce  being  directly  affected  and led  to  severe disruption  of offshore  operations. The  strain  of 
salmonella  identified  was reportedly linked  to  eggs.  The  use  of  raw  eggs, which were incorrectly  stored, is 
suspected to have been the cause of the food-borne illnesses.

One of the findings of the investigation into the incident was that raw eggs were being stored in the galley at 
room  temperature for  up  to 24  hours  and  adjacent  to  hot appliances  which,  when  in  use, heated the  eggs 
further.  In addition, the raw eggs were being used to make products such as mayonnaise and tartare sauce.

During  a  recent  planned  inspection  on  a  separate  facility, a similar unrefrigerated  storage  arrangement  for 
eggs was also observed.

Room 
Temp

Refrigerated 

<5oC

Figure 1 – Cupboard where eggs were stored at room 

Figure 2 – Eggs stored appropriately in a refrigerator

temperature for up to 24 hours

below 5°C

What could go wrong?

Foods including meat,  poultry,  seafood,  eggs,  dairy  foods,  gravies  and  cooked  rice can  become  potentially 
hazardous as they support the growth of  bacteria under certain conditions.  These foods need to be kept  at 
temperatures either  below  5oC or  above  60oC  to  prevent the growth  of  bacteria that  may be  present in  the 
food which can lead to food poisoning.

In  the  case  of  eggs, salmonella can  contaminate  the  contents  of  clean and intact  shell  eggs  as  a  result  of 
infections  of  the  reproductive  tissue  of  laying  hens.    A  type  of  bacterium,  salmonella,  can  be  on  both the 
outside  and  inside  of  eggs  that  appear  to  be  normal,  and  if  the eggs  are  eaten  raw  or  lightly  cooked,  the 
bacterium can cause illness (gastroenteritis).

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

1 of 2

Safety Alert 53

Food Safety











Key lessons

Foods which can support the growth of bacteria need to be kept at temperatures either below 5oC or 
above 60oC to prevent the growth of any food poisoning bacteria that may be present in the food.

Specific food handling practices that are generally considered to be good practice include:

 Use only whole (i.e. uncracked), clean eggs.

Store eggs under refrigeration, at or below 5°C.

Thoroughly clean hands, surfaces and utensils before and after working with raw eggs.

Keep all food containing raw egg well away from ready-to-eat foods (such as prepared salads or 
sandwiches) throughout preparation and storage.

 Use pasteurised egg products for foods that will not be cooked; such as mayonnaise, eggnog, salad 

dressings, mousse and tiramisu.

If you choose to prepare dishes containing raw or undercooked egg you should prepare the dish as 
close to consumption as possible, using eggs you have just freshly broken open, store the dish under 
refrigeration between preparing and serving.



Refrigerate any leftovers promptly, and discard these within 24 hours.

The legislation

Operators have a duty of care to “take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the facility is safe and 
without risk to the health of any person at or near the facility” as per Clause 9 of Schedule 3 to the Offshore 
Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006.  Under subclause 9(2)(d) operators also have to take all 
reasonably practicable steps to implement and maintain systems of work at the facility that are safe and 
without risk to health.  This subclause is as relevant to food handling practices on a facility as it is to activities 
which may expose workers to fire and explosion hazards.

Contact

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Alert 53.

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

2 of 2

