Safety Alert 47

 
 

Lifeboats - Routine Inspection and Maintenance 

 
What happened? 

Recent  inspections  conducted  by  NOPSA  and  information  provided  to  NOPSA  have  raised 
concerns regarding the general condition of some Totally Enclosed Motor Propelled Survival Craft 
(TEMPSC) currently in use in the offshore regime. 

Inspection findings have resulted in nine enforcement actions on facility operators in the past four 
months. 

The  enforcement  actions  focused  primarily  on  the  lack  of  effective  routine  maintenance  and 
inspections being conducted on facility TEMPSC. 

TEMPSC  were  identified  with  damaged  or  broken  safety  harnesses, unsecured  and  loose  items, 
and  illegible  safety  and  operating  instructions.  A  shortfall  in  the  competencies  of  personnel 
assigned to essential lifeboat duties was also noted. 

NOPSA is particularly concerned that some facilities’ induction processes do not provide personnel 
with suitable familiarisation of assigned lifeboat locations and procedures. The expectations of and 
by personnel during preparation for the boarding process, for example, is also not always clearly 
illustrated in the induction.   

What could go wrong? 

For many facilities currently in service, the TEMPSC are the primary source of evacuation from an 
uncontrolled  or  escalating  major  event,  while  other  facilities  list  the  TEMPSC  as  the  secondary 
means of evacuating personnel. It has been well established however, that major accident events 
may not afford the time or the conditions for helicopters to be employed as the primary means of 
evacuation, leaving TEMPSC as the preferred alternative. 

Delays  in  the  launching  of  TEMPSC  due  to  a  lack  of  familiarisation  with  location  or  procedures 
could  be  the  difference  between  a  successful  controlled  departure  and  an  uncontrolled 
abandonment. The ability by personnel to understand and observe boarding arrangements, secure 
the craft for launch and progress the launching of the TEMPSC itself are all critical to a successful  
evacuation. 

TEMPSC  are  designed  to  provide  for  the  protection  of  personnel  in  extreme  weather  conditions 
and  rough  seas,  however  this  protection  is  negated  if  seat  belts  or  harnesses  cannot  secure 
occupants  during  adverse  movement  or  roll.  Equally,  items  within  the  craft  should  be  securely 
stowed to prevent damage to people or equipment. 

Key lessons: 

Operators are encouraged to review their current procedures concerning TEMPSC and ensure that 
the following issues are suitably addressed: 

  Ensure  the  personnel  induction  process  includes  a  visit  to  the  assigned  lifeboat,  an 
overview of the preparation and boarding procedures and a general familiarisation of your 
specific facility’s TEMPSC and contents. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

May 2011 

Page 1 of 2 

nopsa.gov.au

Safety Alert 47

 
 

  Ensure personnel assigned to lifeboat duties (coxswains, bowmen, etc.) have the required 
training  and  competencies  to  effectively  and  efficiently  board,  launch  and  operate  your 
specific facility’s TEMPSC in all conditions including during the hours of darkness and/or 
inclement weather. 

  Assign  accountability  and  responsibility  for  TEMPSC  maintenance  and  inspections  to  a 

suitable position to ensure ownership of the procedures and processes.   

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Safety Alert 47. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

May 2011 

Page 2 of 2 

nopsa.gov.au

