Safety Alert 15 

Broken Arm while using Drill Press 

 

An offshore employee was using a drill press to drill holes into steel plate and was in the process of 
changing  out  a  drill  bit.    While  the  operator  was  loosening  the  chuck  with  a  chuck  key,  his  foot 
inadvertently made contact with the foot operated pedal which started the machine.  The chuck key 
caught  the  operator’s  glove  as  it  rotated  and  pulled  the  operator’s  wrist  and  forearm  around  the 
chuck  spindle.    A  co-worker  in  the  workshop  stopped  the  machine  by  depressing  the  drill’s 
emergency stop button.  The operator sustained an open fracture forearm injury. 

 
What happened? 

 
What went wrong: 

The drill press was configured with a mushroom type emergency stop, as well as a foot operated 
switch which was configured to act as a stop/start switch (press pedal to start and release pedal to 
stop). 

•  While the operator was using the chuck key to loosen the drill bit, his foot made momentary 

contact with the foot switch and the machine started. 

As the operators arm was pulled into the machine, the operator was unable to react in time to 
activate the mushroom type emergency stop button. 

The  replacement  drill  bit  was  being  changed,  without  effectively  electrically  isolating  the  drill 
press. 

The  drill  press  was  not  fitted  with  any  electrical  interlocking  system,  to  prevent  single  point 
inadvertent operation. 

The drill press did not have any directions for operation or warning signs posted to it. 

 
Key lessons: 

An effective means to electrically isolate the drill press should be implemented before making 
any maintenance or routine adjustments (such as drill bit changes, securing work, or changing 
pulleys for drill speed adjustments). 

Inadvertent  starting  of  the  machine  should  be  designed  out  of  the  system  (in  this  case  by 
configuring the foot switch as a ‘dead-man switch’, interlocked with a start push button). 

The machine should be fitted with an effective clearly marked emergency stop system. 

Operating instructions and warning signs should be posted on the machine. 

 
Recommendations: 

The following recommendations are applicable to all workshop electrical machines. 

The  machines  operation  and  emergency  stopping  should  be  reviewed  to  ensure  safe 
operation in both routine and emergency conditions.   

The review should consider any workshop situations where an operator can be working alone, 
verifying the effectiveness of the emergency stop arrangement. 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

References: 

 - AS 60204.1 – 2005 (incorporating Amendment No. 1)  

Safety of machinery – Electrical equipment machines 

 

- AS/NZS 3947:2000 

Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear 

 - ISO 13850:2006 

Safety of machinery – Emergency stop – Principles of design 

 
Contact for further information: 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 15. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

