 

Safety Alert 55 

 

        Revision 3        30/05/2018       

Risks associated with pneumatic hose couplings 

 

NB: Further to publishing Safety Alert 55 in March 2013, we provide additional information about correct 
fitting of extended hose restraints. The hose restraint images are courtesy of Dixon Group Europe Ltd. 

What happened? 

NOPSEMA OHS regulatory specialists have noticed that pressurised air hose couplings have been incorrectly 
assembled on some facilities. During one inspection, the inspector found that a coupling had been assembled 
without a safety pin to secure the fitting and without extending the hose restraint. 

Air hose coupling WITHOUT safety pins 

Air hose coupling WITH safety pins 

 

Safety Pins 

Hose 

Restraints  

 

 

Air hose coupling WITHOUT extended hose restraint 

Air hose coupling WITH extended hose restraint 

 

What could go wrong? 

Neglecting  to  fit  coupled  air  hoses  with  safety  clips  and/or  hose  restraints  can  increase  the  risk  of  a  high 
velocity impact incident.   

Air hose coupling failures reported overseas have caused a number of serious incidents resulting in injury or 
death (see https://www.imca-int.com/alert/219/fatality-injury-from-an-air-hose/).  

Incorrect assembly of air hoses presents a risk not only to the person operating the equipment, but to others 
in the vicinity. 

Key lessons 

Equipment operators and supervisors of work activities should review their practices for the use of pneumatic 
(air-powered)  tools,  hoses  and  couplings.    It  is  important  that  members  of  the  workforce  who  use  this 
equipment,  and  those  responsible  for  their  supervision,  have  had  the  relevant  training  before  work 
commences. 

Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 places duties on the operator of a 
facility to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that: 

the facility is safe and without risk to the health of any person at or near the facility; and 

• 
•  all  work  and  other  activities  carried  out  on  the  facility  are  carried  out  in  a  manner  that  is  safe  and 

without risk to the health of any person at or near the facility. 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Safety Alert 55. 

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority         A296017         Revision 3         Revision Date: 30/05/2018 

1 of 1 

