Safety Alert 04 

Incidents – Start Up and Commissioning 

 
 
What happened? 
Two recent incidents during start up and commissioning activities have demonstrated the 
importance of correct material/parts selection: 

 

1.  Gasket failure – A process shutdown lead to a transient pressure surge in the pipework 

which resulted in the failure of two gaskets, and a subsequent leak of hydrocarbons.  
The release activated the facility fire and gas system, resulting in an emergency 
shutdown.  Deluge was manually activated until the system had bled down and the 
release was confirmed to have ceased.  There was no resultant fire or injuries. 

2.  Fuel line failure – A fuel leak from a generator fuel line resulted in fuel being sprayed 

onto the generator exhaust resulting in a small pool fire.  A Maintenance Engineer, 
working in an adjacent workshop, smelt fuel and entered the generator room to 
investigate.  He found a fuel oil mist around the generator and called the control room 
and notified of the leak.  He then called for a ships generator to be put on line and left 
the generator room and shutdown the generator remotely.  On his return to inspect the 
engine, a small pool fire had started on the hot exhaust manifold covers.  The fire was 
extinguished with a hand held extinguisher and there were no injuries. 

 
 
What went wrong? 
The incorrect installation of parts was a contributing factor in both incidents.  Investigation 
of incident 1 found that a large number of installed gaskets did not meet the pipe 
specification.  Two gaskets failed when exposed to an elevated pressure.  Likewise for 
incident 2, the investigation found that incorrect hoses had been installed in a fuel supply 
service on the generator, which consequently leaked, resulting in a fire. 

Contributing factors for the two incidents included: 

Failure of quality control and commissioning checks to identify the risk; 

The crew were unfamiliar with detailed system specifications and there was no formal 
handover process between construction/installation to operations; and 

Commissioning checks and leak testing did not highlight the faulty parts. 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 

NOPSA SAFETY ALERT 04 cont’d 
 
Key lessons 
While there are lessons specific to each incident, the following key lessons are common to 
both: 

•  Quality control inspections during installation and commissioning of equipment must 
be sufficient to verify that equipment and components meet approved specifications. 

•  Operators should ensure equipment suppliers provide adequate documentation and 

specifications and that these are incorporated into drawings and commissioning 
procedures. 

•  Where possible, the commissioning and operations workforces should be integrated 

during the facility construction phase and should both be involved in quality checks at 
system mechanical completion. 

• 

The operations workforce should be engaged as early as possible in the project to 
enhance facility and system familiarisation and awareness. 

 
 
 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 04 
 

