Safety Alert 48

  
 

Tube Compression Fitting Failure 
 

What happened? 

A recent near miss incident has identified that compression fittings associated with high pressure 
tubing lines have the potential to fail by working loose under certain conditions. 

 

Potential failure will not be evident without adequate post-assembly inspection and may not become 
apparent for a number of years due to a range of factors including operating conditions and the 
material of the tube and fittings. Even during regular pressure testing, it is not uncommon for these 
‘compromised’ fittings to pass the initial and subsequent tests prior to the main failure event. 

In relation to this recent incident, subsequent inspections by the operator determined that 
approximately 50 per cent of similar fittings required attention as a result of: 

 

 

incorrect insertion depth with ferrules set at the end of the tube (see above photograph); or  

ferrules had worked loose over a period of time because of improper fitting assembly at 
installation followed by exposure to vibration or pressure pulsations. 

Materials such as MP35N alloy, used for ferrules for some compression fittings, are of a very high 
yield and tensile strength. This quality however, can prevent the ferrule from “biting” into the parent 
tube material if insufficient pressure and torque is applied when assembling the fitting. 

What could go wrong? 

Compression fitting ferrules exposed to vibration and pressure pulsations could work axially along 
the tube over a period of time if incorrectly installed or the tube compression fittings are composed of 
incompatible materials. 

This event can potentially lead to a loss of containment of high pressure flammable vapour or fluid 
and subsequently result in a dangerous occurrence or major accident event. 

 

June 2011 

Page 1 of 2 

nopsa.gov.au

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 48

  
 

Key lessons 

A manufacturer of any plant has a general duty of care under the OPGGS Act 2006 to take all 
reasonably practicable steps to ensure the plant is designed and constructed to be safe and without 
risk to health. In addition, the manufacturer is responsible for carrying out the research, testing and 
examination necessary to identify, and eliminate or minimise, any risk to health and safety that may 
arise from the use of the plant. 

Operators should carry out an audit of compression tube fittings and ensure that these fittings have 
been installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and that the ferrules remain 
in the correct location. 

Operators are to ensure installation and inspection competency in personnel including contractors 
and third parties undertaking the fitting and maintenance of compression fittings. This may include 
the implementation of a maintenance audit regime that routinely inspects compression fittings 
subjected to vibration and pressure pulsations, with comprehensive and complementary training and 
procedures. 

Recommended guidelines are available in the Oil and Gas UK publication HS016 Management, 
Design, Installation and Maintenance of Small Bore Tubing System. 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Safety Alert 48. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

June 2011 

Page 2 of 2 

nopsa.gov.au

