Safety Alert 06 

Fatigue 

 

 

 

Case 1

Case 2

 
What happened? 

Fatigue is emerging as a significant safety risk in the offshore oil & gas industry. Two 
recent, unrelated incidents are being closely followed by NOPSA. There are ongoing 
investigations to determine the root causes. Nevertheless, fatigue is a significant 
contributing factor in both. 

A worker on a pipe laying barge suffered a blackout without warning and fell. The worker 
had no previous medical condition and had passed a pre-employment medical the day 
before the event. He was medivaced for treatment of cuts and bruises and underwent 
further extensive medical examination. The examination did not find any medical condition 
that could explain the blackout. 

The worker had been working for at least 22 hours, including travelling. After arrival on the 
facility and induction he went straight into night shift. He suffered the blackout in the first 
shift. Had he been operating heavy equipment or machinery, the consequence of the 
blackout could have been far more significant. 

A service company employee with several years of experience, while performing a routine 
operation, suffered an electric shock and burns to his fingers. Due to communication errors 
and a lack of alertness and concentration, his fingers came in contact with live current. 

The crew had been despatched to site early in the morning, and had been travelling and 
working for 21 hours when the incident occurred. 

 
 
What went wrong? 

A significant contributing factor for the above cases is fatigue. The effects of fatigue vary 
from individual to individual. They can include impaired decision making, delayed response 
time, inability to concentrate, reduced alertness, and blackout. 

In the cases above, the site management team and / or service company's management 
team failed to manage the risk associated with fatigue. There was a perceived need to 
carry on with the job. Experts have recently confirmed NOPSA's view that effective risk 

management controls must be put in place to deal with the risks arising from fatigue; 
however it is caused (long hours, travelling long distances to work, shift changeovers, etc). 

Fortunately, there were no serious injuries or prolonged ill effects in both the above cases. 
However, there was the potential for serious injury to the workers or others on the facility. 

Accountabilities for fatigue management obligations are specified under the 
Commonwealth Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act (Occupational Health and Safety) 
Regulations 1993 Part 2 Clause 4A. The duties as specified under these regulations have 
not been complied with in the above two cases. 

 
 
Key Lessons 

•  Recognise fatigue as a serious safety risk that requires appropriate risk management. 
•  Fatigue can cause impaired decision marking, delayed response time, inability to 

•  Set a clear policy relating to hours of work and communicate it to management and 

concentrate, and reduced alertness.  

employees. 
Include travel time as working hours. 

• 

 

 

 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 06 
 

