 

 

Safety Alert 09 

Shut Down Valve Failure 

 
What happened? 
A recent incident involving the failure of a shut down valve (SDV), and the subsequent 
failure of two pressure safety valves (PSV), has highlighted issues associated with the 
selection of SDVs and the need for regular maintenance and testing of SDVs and PSVs. 

The failure occurred after an electrical supply fault caused an emergency shutdown of a 
gas processing plant.  Upon subsequent start up of the plant and one of the plant’s 
compressors, an SDV passed on closure allowing the gas pressure to build up in a 
crossover header between high pressure and low pressure pipework systems.  Another 
compressor was then started further increasing the pressure.  Two PSVs in the gas line 
failed to operate at their set pressure and the pressure continued to rise until a rupture disk 
relieved to flare. 

 
What went wrong? 
The incident investigation found that the SDV failed due to internal damage as a result of 
the externally actuated valve breaking through an internal stop.  The SDV was an actuated 
ball valve design with stops internal to the valve.  Internal inspection of the valve found that 
the stop slot in the ball was damaged allowing the valve to over travel, and the valve seats 
had been sheared. 

Debris from the damaged SDV was found to have lodged in a downstream PSV which 
contributed to its failure to activate.  This PSV also showed signs of corrosion and had not 
been stripped down for an extended period due to failure to carry out planned maintenance.  
Another downstream PSV partially opened, but then re-seated, failing to fully relieve the 
increasing gas pressure.  While this PSV had been previously tested, no records of 
previous strip downs of the valve were found.  In addition, the regular inspection of the 
SDVs did not include testing to ensure SDVs closed and sealed on actuation. 

 
Key Lessons 
• 

Shut down valves (SDV) and their actuators must be properly selected and sized for 
their intended service.  For shut down and isolation service, movement of valves is 
usually limited by stops on their external actuators – it is not normal practice to have a 
stop pin or key internal to the valve when it is actuated.  Recommended industry 
practice is for use of external stops for most applications, while positive internal stops 
are generally only suitable for light duty applications.  Existing SDVs should be 
reviewed to ensure that the combination of actuator and stops is suitable for the 
service. 

• 

Pressure safety valves (PSV) should be regularly inspected and tested in accordance 
with manufacturer’s specifications and relevant Standards.  These inspections should 
include regular stripping down of the valves, where appropriate. 

Regular inspection and testing of emergency shut down systems should include 
testing of the final element (i.e. appropriate closure and sealing of the SDV). 

 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 09 
 

• 

 

 

