 
 
SAFETY ALERT 37 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 
 
 
Boiler Furnace Explosions

What happened? 

Recent  incidents  on  Floating  Production,  Storage  and  Offloading  (FPSO) 
facilities  in  Australian  waters  have  highlighted  the  dangers  of  unignited  fuel 
accumulating  in  boiler  furnaces.    In  two  cases  there  were  explosions  in  boiler 
furnaces  resulting  in  structural  damage  to  the  boiler.    Fortunately  no  one  was 
injured. 
 
A furnace explosion is a rapid uncontrolled combustion of fuel in the combustion 
chamber or exhaust uptake of a boiler resulting in high overpressure.  The basic 
cause of this is the ignition of an accumulation of unburned fuel at some point in 
the system. 
 
One  incident  involved  a  number  of  failed  attempts  to  light  a  boiler  on  diesel  oil 
and  a  further  attempt  to  light  the  burner  on  fuel  gas.    A  furnace  explosion 
occurred which caused structural damage to the membrane walls of the furnace.  
In  another  case,  whilst  two  boilers  were  being  brought  on  line,  there  was  a 
furnace  explosion  in  one  boiler  shortly  after  the  third  successive  light  up  of  the 
burner  on  oil  fuel.    This  caused  extensive  damage  to  the  furnace  casing  and 
uptakes. 
 
Whilst the boilers are of different types and makes, the two incidents highlight the 
hazardous conditions that can arise during routine light up operations.  A furnace 
flashback or sudden release of the boiler contents due to structural damage may 
have serious consequences for personnel in the area. 
 

Furnace casing damage 

Page 1 of 3 

 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 
 
 
Boiler Furnace Explosions

 
 
SAFETY ALERT 37 

 

Damaged boiler exhaust uptake 

 
What could go wrong? 

•  Several unsuccessful attempts to relight a burner result in an accumulation of 
unburned fuel in the boiler furnace.  Ineffective purging of the furnace and gas 
passages  with  air  will  result  in  pockets  of  combustible  mixture  remaining  in 
the system. 

•  Poor combustion and/or defective burners can result in deposits of unburned 

fuel in the furnace. 

•  Unstable  fuel  control  systems  can  cause  fuel  pressure  spikes,  flow  surges 
and  poor  combustion  with  the  attendant  risks  of  explosive  ignition  in  the 
furnace. 
Incorrect  fuel  gas  flow  control  valve  settings  can  introduce  quantities  of  fuel 
gas  into  the  combustion  chamber,  well  in  excess  of  the  minimum  amount 
required for light up. 

• 

•  Leaking  fuel  shut  down  valves  and  pipe  connections  can  result  in  an 

accumulation of unburned fuel in the furnace. 

 
Key Lessons 

•  Even  small  amounts  of  accumulated  combustible  mixture  in  a  boiler  furnace 

can, on ignition, cause explosions with serious consequences. 

•  Operators should  ensure  that  automatic  combustion  control  systems  are  not 
degraded.  Properly functioning and maintained automatic burner fuel control 
systems should not normally require manual intervention. 

Page 2 of 3 

 
 
SAFETY ALERT 37 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 
 
Boiler Furnace Explosions 

•  Procedures should be in place for the start up and safe operation of boilers on 
oil and gas fuel.  These procedures should include mitigating measures to be 
taken by operators should flame failure occur. 

•  Always  identify  the  cause  of  persistent  flame  failures  before  attempting  to 
relight  a  burner.    Ensure  an  extended  purge  cycle  after  repeated  failed 
attempts to light up a burner so that unburned fuel vapour is dispersed from 
the furnace and gas passages. 

•  Burners should be lit with oil/gas fuel at the minimum design flow rate that is 

necessary for stable flame establishment. 

•  A system for periodic checks of burners, fuel shut down valves, safeguarding 

devices and instruments should be in place. 

 
Who is responsible? 

Under  provisions  of  the  Offshore  Petroleum  and  Greenhouse  Gas  Storage  Act 
2006,  operators  of  facilities  have  a  duty  of  care  to  ensure  that  plant  and 
equipment at the facility are safe and without risk to health.  Manufacturers and 
suppliers  of  plant  also  have  a  duty  to  ensure  that  plant,  when  properly  used,  is 
safe and without risk to health. 
 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 37. 

Page 3 of 3 

