NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

  

SAFETY ALERT 20 

Risks from Electric Hand Tools 

What happened? 

While carrying out a routine inspection, NOPSA inspectors recently discovered someone 
using  an  electric  hand  tool  rated  at  240V  in  an  environment  where  the  power  supply 
leads  could  easily  be  damaged  by  activities  such  as  cutting,  grinding  and  welding  of 
steel  sections.  The  circumstances  were  such  that  a  prohibition  notice  was  issued  to 
prevent the risk of one or more electrocutions. 

What could go wrong? 

Every year, people are killed by electrocution. The National Occupational Health and 
Safety Commission gives a figure of 122 workers killed between 1989 and 1992 in 
Australia. Of these, many were killed by 240 volt systems. 28% of the fatalities were 
associated with use of industrial equipment or work tools. Significantly, 7% of the total 
number of deaths occurred on systems protected by a residual current circuit breaker.  

NOPSA has received 29 notifications of electric shock incidents in the last three years, 
and, although none of these offshore incidents have resulted in deaths, in some cases 
this may simply have been a matter of luck. 

Key Lessons: 

Schedule 3 of the Offshore Petroleum Act 2006 places duties on various parties to take 
all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that all work activities carried out on a facility 
are safe, and without risk to the health of any person at or near that facility. 

Good practice demands that a hierarchical approach to eliminating risks is taken. This 
means that the following steps must be followed in order: 

•  Elimination of the risk; 
•  Substitution for a less hazardous alternative; 
•  Redesign; 
•  Separate the worker from the risk; 
•  The use of administrative procedures such as permit to work systems; 
•  The use of PPE. 

 

240 volt hand tools can often be replaced by air tools, eliminating the risk from 
electrocution, making them a viable alternative whenever the use of powered hand tools 
is required. 

If the use of air tools is not possible, then substitution should be considered. Options 
under this category include the use of battery powered hand tools, or tools powered by 
an isolated, 110 volt centre-tapped earth transformer. 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

  

SAFETY ALERT 20 

Risks from Electric Hand Tools 

These methods of elimination or substitution are generally achievable, and it is therefore 
reasonable for them to be adopted in preference to the use of 240 volt tools.  

Facility operators, employers, and persons in charge of work activities on facilities 
should review their practices for the use of powered hand tools in light of the above 
information. 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 20. 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

