 
SAFETY ALERT 42 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 

 

What happened? 

Hot Work Leads to Fire 

A recent fire on a normally unattended platform has highlighted the requirement to 
ensure that risk assessments are conducted as thoroughly as possible and are not over-
reliant on referencing previously conducted risk assessments from similar tasks. 

The fire was detected visually from an approaching vessel transporting a crew of 
workers to the facility to continue repair work, replacing structural steel. 

During the morning approach it was identified that a section of the timber scaffold 
planking was on fire.  The boat stopped on approach and stood by at a safe distance 
while the alarm was raised and the facility production, shutdown and blowdown, was 
initiated. 

When it was deemed safe to board the facility the crew identified a 3 metre by 3 metre 
section of the planking missing (assumed burned) and some remaining boards were 
burning and smouldering.  Affected boards were jettisoned into the ocean and recovered 
by another vessel. 

The crew’s work on the day previous to the fire involved the removal of structural steel 
members using oxy-acetylene cutting equipment, conducted in hides, located on 
scaffolding.  The timber planking at the base of the hides was covered in fire blankets 
and a fire watch was engaged to observe the work. 

At the completion of the day’s work a final inspection of the hides was conducted prior to 
the crew departing the facility. 

During the period between personnel departing the facility and returning the following 
morning, a flame detector at the facility went into alarm and returned to normal.  While 
this alarm was captured in logs, the information was not communicated to the crew prior 
to attending the facility. 

What could go wrong? 

Despite the fire blankets providing good coverage of the hide flooring there will always 
be pockets and folds in the blankets, particularly around areas where piping and 
structural members penetrate through the hide / habitat. 

Hot “slag” from oxy-acetylene gouging may find it’s way into the pockets and folds 
without being visually detected on inspections.  Where this slag comes in contact with a 
combustible material (e.g. timber planks) there is potential for a fire to take hold. 

Several factors, both planned and good fortune, prevented escalation of the fire to a far 
more significant event.  These included: 

  The fire blankets on top of the boards prevented the natural escalation of the 

flames; 

exposed; 

  Good housekeeping within the hides meant that no flammable materials were left 

  The area where the work was being conducted was furthest from the facility’s 

hydrocarbon piping; and 

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 
SAFETY ALERT 42 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Hot Work Leads to Fire 

  Favourable weather conditions in regard to wind speed and direction. 

Key Lessons: 

  HAZIDs, Risk Assessments, JHAs and other evaluations should be conducted for 

each individual project / work scope.  What worked previously does not necessarily 
apply to the task at hand. 

  Consideration should be given to alternative methods of work and equipment.  In 

this instance the risk of hot work as opposed to cold cutting; the use of steel or grid 
mesh as opposed to timber planking. 

  Operators should develop a specification for construction of their hides / habitats 

that includes consideration of detection equipment / instrumentation, both existing 
and temporary. 

  Consider the development of guidelines / procedures / competencies for personnel 

required to perform fire-watch duties. 

  Consider the development of checklists for (pre-) and (post-) hot work within 

habitats / hides. 

  Fires can smoulder for a significant period after work has ceased and therefore 

consideration should also be given to making thorough post-job inspections 
and possibly work-site wet down, a requirement of the permit. 

Who is responsible? 

(i)  The Operator of an offshore facility has a general duty of care under the Offshore 

Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 to ensure that all work and 
other activities are safe, and that the risk to the health of people is as low as 
reasonably practicable.  Specifically, the Operator must implement and maintain 
safe systems of work and ensure any plant and equipment are safe. 

(ii)  Any person who is in control of any part of a facility or particular work carried out 

at a facility has similar duties to the Operator for that part of the facility or that 
particular activity. 

(iii) Every person at a facility must at all times take all reasonably practicable steps to 

ensure that by any act or omission, they do not create or increase a risk to the 
health or safety of either themselves or anyone else. 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 42. 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

