SAFETY ALERT 26

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Importance of maintaining well-test flow-lines

What happened?

Prior to use of a well testing package on a semi-submersible MODU, pressure 
tests were conducted on the permanently installed, but infrequently used, oil and 
gas lines from the separator to the burner booms. The pressure test on the oil 
line failed and a visual inspection revealed that the line had washed out at an 
elbow. The permanent oil and gas lines were installed underneath the MODU’s 
stern walkway and could only be inspected from a basket suspended over the 
side of the MODU.

A decision was made to install temporary flowlines to enable the well test to 
proceed. The temporary flowlines were run along the stern walkway at the main 
deck level. A welded line was used for oil and a chiksan line was used for gas.

Gas testing checks were carried out along the line at regular intervals, using 
portable gas testing equipment, and on two occasions gas was detected leaking 
from chiksan connections. Instead of shutting down the well test with the ESD as 
instructed, the gas-tester chose to consult with the well test supervisors on how 
to handle the gas leak.

What could go wrong?

As the permanently installed lines were only tested immediately prior to the 
commencement of the well test, their failure meant that a number of 
compromises were made in completing the well test.

Although the area was barricaded during actual testing, running a number of 
temporary lines along dedicated walkways could have caused significant delays 
or injury if people were required to respond to an emergency.

Detection of leakage from the temporary oil and gas lines was reliant on hand 
held gas sensors or a visual sighting during the regular walk-through, as the 
lines, being virtually open ended, could not be fitted with high or low pressure 
sensors.

Key Lessons

Facility operators must ensure that all safety critical equipment is managed under 
an effective inspection and maintenance programme.  The permanent well 
testing flowlines on the facility were not subject to any inspection or examination 
and had not been included in the planned maintenance system of the facility. 

Management of change processes must ensure that appropriate levels of hazard 
identification and risk assessment are made and that appropriate information is 
available to supervisors and to the workforce. Task level risk assessments may 

Page 1 of 2

SAFETY ALERT 26

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Importance of maintaining well-test flow-lines

not always be appropriate when complex circumstances such as hydrocarbon 
leaks are involved.

Finally, crews must have clear instructions and clearly stated authority to act 
decisively when hydrocarbon leaks are detected.

Who is responsible?

(i)

(ii)

The operator of an offshore facility has the general duties of care under 
the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 to 
ensure all work and activities are safe and the risk to people is as low 
as reasonably practicable. Specifically, the operator must implement 
and maintain a safe system of work for any plant and equipment.
Any titleholder and service contractor who is in control of any particular 
work carried out at a facility has similar duties as the operator for that
particular activity.

Contact
For further information email alerts @nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 26.

Page 2 of 2

