Safety alert 51

March 2012

Watertight doors and hatches kept open at sea

What happened? 

During  a  number  of  recent  inspections  of  vessels  which  are  offshore  facilities,  NOPSEMA  occupational 
health  and  safety inspectors have  observed several instances  where designated  watertight doors - which 
are to be closed at sea - have been routinely left open.

Photo 1 – Water tight door to High Precision 
Acoustic Positioning System space, marked “To 
be kept closed at sea” left open and blocked 
with ventilation trunking.  The facility was in 
Dynamic Position mode close to a petroleum 
production platform.

What could go wrong?

Photo 2 – A large hatch on an FPSO was left open while the 
FPSO was connected to a buoy.  The hatch leads to lower 
machinery spaces. The hatch is clearly marked “When at 
sea keep shut”.

Common safety-critical elements aboard vessels that are facilities, such as floating production storage and 
offloading  Units  (FPSOs)  and offshore  construction  vessels, include  watertight integrity and  measures for 
maintaining stability (for both the intact and damage cases). These safety-critical elements are commonly 
designed and constructed in accordance with codes and standards such as the:

Classification society rules


 DNV-OS-C301 Stability and Watertight Integrity

Intact Stability Code (IMO Resolution A749)
 Mobile Offshore Drilling Unit (MODU) Code



Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) Convention
Load Line Convention

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

1

Safety alert 51

These  codes  and  standards  detail  the  location,  strength  and  use  of all  forms  of  weather  and  watertight 
enclosures  for  various  stability  cases.    The  use  of  such  enclosures  provides  a  level  of  assurance  that  the 
facility  could  reasonably  survive  an  incident  involving  loss  of  watertight  integrity  or  defined  worst case 
damage scenario.

The  design  of  vessels that  are facilities presumes  that  watertight doors  are closed  whilst  the facility  is  at 
sea, hence the doors are permanently marked as such at the new build stage.  This does not stop the crew 
passing through these doors but it is assumed the doors are then closed immediately afterwards.

Leaving  these  doors  unattended  and  permanently  open  at  sea,  especially during  Dynamic  Position
operations  and  when  the vessel is  close  to  another  facility, increases the risk to  the health  and  safety of 
personnel.  SOLAS II-I Regulation 22, regarding the prevention and control of water ingress, describes how 
watertight  doors  should  be  used, including how  and  when  these  doors  can  be  left  open  and  when  they 
need to be closed.

In the context of internal and external watertight integrity, NOPSEMA considers a vessel that is being used, 
or  being  prepared  for  use,  at  a  site  in  Commonwealth  waters  (i.e.  as  a  facility) to be  ‘at  sea’.    This  is 
consistent  with the  UK  HSE  Research  Report  387  (2005) on  Stability which  applies  water-tight  door  and 
enclosure requirements when the vessel is on station or afloat.

As a reminder, loss of watertight integrity recently resulted in multiple fatalities from the Costa Concordia 
incident off the Italian coast.

Key lessons

The law

Contact

 Operators of vessels that are facilities should ensure compliance to load line, stability (intact and 

damage) and watertight integrity requirements.

 Operators should ensure they are fully compliant with commitments made in their safety case.

 Operators should ensure their personnel are aware of the risks and their responsibilities associated 

with leaving watertight doors unattended and in the open position when at sea.

 Operators have a duty of care to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure equipment at the 

facility is safe and without risk to health (Clause 9, Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum 
Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006).



All  persons,  including  employees,  have  a  duty  of  care  to  take  all  reasonably  practicable  steps  to 
ensure that they do not take any action, or make any omission, that creates a risk to persons on the 
facility (Clause 15, Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006).

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote:  Safety Alert 51.

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

2

