 

 

SAFETY ALERT 02 
Laundry Operations 

 

What happened? 
Three recent incidents indicate the need to operate and maintain laundry equipment in 
accordance with good housekeeping practices and manufacturers instructions. 
 
What went wrong? 

•  Ignition of lint that had accumulated within a laundry dryer  
•  Ignition of laundry within an laundry dryer  
•  Suspicion of the ignition of plastic material found in residue within the dryer following the 

incident  

 

Key Lessons 
NOPSA consulted Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia (FESA) Fire 
Investigators who provided advice based on experience of investigating laundry fires within 
Western Australia.  The following issues include matters raised by FESA and some matters 
associated with the incidents that led to the development of this alert. 
 
Issue 1:  Lint accumulation not removed in accordance with manufacturers instructions. 
Problem 1:  A back pressure can be created within the dryer that causes lint to enter the internal 
section of the dryer where it can contact the heater element and lead to combustion. 
Solution 1:  Regularly clean lint filters in accordance with manufacturers instructions. 
 
Issue 2:  Lint build up on air escape outlet of dryer 
Problem 2:  Concentration of combustible material in the region of the air outlet. 
Solution 2:  Vacuum or sweep around dryer paying special attention to air outlets during 
cleaning schedules to remove any build up of combustible material. 
 
Issue 3:  Laundry taken out of the dryer prior to completion of the cooling cycle. 
Problem 3:  Laundry removed before the completion of the cooling cycle has the potential to self 
heat and combust. 
Solution 3:  Do not remove clothes from a dryer until the programmed cooling cycle is 
completed. 

NOPSA SAFETY ALERT 02 cont’d 
 
 
Issue 4:  Interrupting the dryer cycle. 
Problem 4:  Interrupting the dryer cycle can promote the conditions that lead to self heating and 
combustion of laundry. 
Solution 4:  Ensure that complete programmed cycles are completed in accordance with 
appliance manufacturer's instructions. 
 
Issue 5:  Incompletely cleaned laundry being placed in the dryer with the appliance overloaded. 
Problem 5:  Organic oil residues (predominantly found on tea towels) have been found to have 
combusted when laundry is packed tightly and self heating has led to ignition of the oils. 
Solution 5:  Ensure items that may have contained organic oils are properly cleaned before 
loading into a dryer.  Follow the loading instructions of the manufacturer and operate the 
appliance in accordance with the programmed cycle. 
 
Issue 6:  Items other than laundry placed in dryers. 
Problem 6:  Items other than laundry that are subjected to dryer conditions can lead to 
combustion within the dryer. 
Solution 6:  Sort laundry to ensure that no items with the potential for combustion have been left 
in the pockets of clothes or other places where such items can be concealed. 
 
Recommendation 
NOPSA recommends that the advice provided in this safety alert is implemented into the safety 
management systems of laundering operations in offshore facilities 
 
Contact  
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 02. 

