SAFETY ALERT 17 

  

Engine Room Fire 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 

What happened? 
An engine room fire onboard a MODU recently caused significant damage. The fire took one 
hour  to  bring  under  control,  and  a  further  3  hours  for  boundary  cooling  etc.  There  were  no 
injuries.  

Unsuccessful  attempts  were  made  to  fight  the  fire  with  water;  hand-held  extinguishers  were 
used  to  some  effect  but  could  not  control  the  fire.  The  fire  was  brought  under  control  by 
dousing with CO2. Boundary cooling was achieved using water cannon from a stand-by boat. 

The engine room and its equipment suffered considerable fire damage. The rig will be out of 
operation for a number of weeks. 

 
What went wrong? 
The cause of the fire is believed to be radiant heat from an uninsulated and cracked exhaust 
bellows igniting the insulation in the deck head. The insulation was later found to be soiled 
(loaded with soot and hydrocarbons). The fire spread through the engine room and briefly 
flashed over to the engine room roof. 

Factors that caused the fire to escalate include: 

(cid:131)  Availability of flammable material in the engine room, including hydrocarbon 

contaminated insulation and a wheelie bin.  

(cid:131)  Main fire water pumps unavailable once the main generators were shut down. 

(cid:131)  The fire in the engine room ruptured the rig-air line. The loss of rig air disabled the 

emergency fire pump’s automatic air primer. It took over 2 hours to manually prime and 
start the emergency fire pump.  

(cid:131)  The rig-air isolation valve for the engine room was in the engine room. 

(cid:131)  Some portable fire extinguishers did not function. 

Factors that may have led to further escalation of the fire include: 

(cid:131)  Bulk lube oil & hydraulic fluid were stored on the engine room roof – a brief flash fire 

occurred in this area before being extinguished by the support vessel’s water cannon. 

 
Key Lessons: 

(cid:131)  Engine  room  fires  are  a  very  serious  risk.  Inspection  and  maintenance  of  exhausts, 
fuel  lines,  turbochargers  &  superchargers  are  critical,  including  the  inspection  and 
replacement  of  contaminated/damaged  insulation.  Housekeeping  and  cleanliness 
make a difference in reducing risk and damage.  

(cid:131)  Provision and testing of emergency equipment is critical (in this case some CO2 

cylinders did not activate when required and some portable fire extinguishers did not 
function). Redundancy in emergency systems can save lives. 

(cid:131)  Consideration for facility specific common mode failures and escalation factors (in this 

case the rig air system).  

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

SAFETY ALERT 17 

  

Engine Room Fire 

(cid:131)  The role of stand-by vessels is critical. 

(cid:131)  Highlights  importance  of  emergency  response  for  various  scenarios.  Practice  makes 

perfect. 

 

(cid:131)  Above Pictures - Uninsulated and 

cracked engine exhaust bellow where 
fire was thought to initiate. 

(cid:131)  Picture to right - Hydrocarbon 
contaminated insulation on an 
adjacent engine exhaust bellow. A 
hole in the pipe was found when the 
insulation was removed for inspection. 

 

 

 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 17. 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

