 

 

 

Safety Alert 11 

Potential Man-overboard Hazards – Jettison Skids 

 
 
NOPSA inspectors visiting Mobile Offshore Drilling Units have noted potential man-
overboard hazards associated with the configuration of explosives magazines stored on 
jettison skids. 
 
Explosives used in well operations are typically stored within dedicated magazines, which 
in turn are stored on jettison skids. The jettison skids allow the explosives magazines to be 
dumped into the sea in the event of a major fire. 
 
 
What is wrong? 
There are a variety of types of jettison skids in use, mounted or configured in a number of 
ways. NOPSA’s concerns relates to situations where people working on or around those 
jettison skids are exposed to unacceptable risks of falling overboard. 
 
The type of work may include installation of magazines, handling of explosives and 
maintenance of the magazine or jettison skid. 
 
Jettison skids are often located outboard of the handrails or edge of the deck, and the 
magazines are often positioned so that people wanting to open the doors have to climb up 
to access the door catches. 
 
A poor design may mean that workers are tempted to climb up on the handrail to access 
the doors – and in many cases there are no barriers or fall protection to prevent them falling 
overboard if they slip or lose their footing. 
 
The design of the jettison support structure and its location, whether it is sitting inboard or 
out board of the handrail, has important implication for the safe handling of both the 
explosives and the magazines. Examples of both good and poor1 design are provided in 
the attached photographs. 
 
By incorporating human factors considerations into the design, operators can provide safe 
access for installation, maintenance and general use of explosives magazines and jettison 
skids.  
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
1 Improvements have already been made to several installations including the one identified as poor design 

Key Lessons 

•  Equipment that is “added on” tends not to receive adequate level of risk assessment 

prior to installation. 

•  Mitigating one risk (having explosives on board during a fire) may increase other 

risks (falling over board) if not properly planned. 

 

 

•  The most practical consideration is to incorporate human factors in the design of 
these platforms by including safe access, removing the need to climb or stretch, and 
reducing the potential for man-overboard situations during the use, inspection and 
maintenance of the skids.  

 
 
Recommendations 
 
Facility operators should review their current jettison skid arrangements and improve the 
structure and/or system of work as appropriate. Operators and contractors should also 
review the work instructions or JSA’s2 related to these tasks to ensure hazards are properly 
identified and managed. 
 
The Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Management of Safety on Offshore Facilities) 
Regulations 19963 address design issues under regulation 16. 
 
 
Examples of jettison skid installations 
 
Good Design 
 

Poor design 
 

 

No easy way to climb up to retrieve 
explosives. No fall protection. 

 
Explosives can be retrieved 
standing on main-deck. 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
2 JSA – Job Safety Analysis 
3 
http://www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/LegislativeInstrumentCompilation1.nsf/current%5Cbytitle/7EDAC4B06D19CA67CA25706
000167272?OpenDocument&mostrecent=1

