 

 

 

Safety Alert 14 

Fast Rescue Craft Safety 

 

 

What happened? 
A temporary arrangement observed during a recent NOPSA inspection has highlighted the 
importance of making sure a fast rescue craft (FRC) is suitable for its intended purpose. 

Following the failure of the platform’s original FRC, a replacement FRC was brought in from 
a nearby facility as a temporary measure.  A Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was performed by 
the platform workforce on the use of the replacement FRC and a number of hazards were 
identified, including: 

•  The location of the lifting point directly above 
the Coxswain’s head without the provision of 
any over-head protection; 

•  The potential for snatching of the chains 

once at sea level (in rough seas); and 

•  No quick-release hook – potential for 

hand/finger injuries whilst attempting to 
connect to, or disconnect from, the hook. 

The risk control measures identified during the JSA to address the identified hazards were 
limited to procedural controls and awareness of the hazards.  As a result, the work party 
had safety concerns with the temporary arrangements and it was decided that the FRC was 
not safe to launch.  Given that the FRC had not been taken out of service at the time of the 
inspection, and based on the JSA’s reliance on procedural controls and hazard awareness, 
it was considered that the use of the FRC would present an imminent threat to safety.   

Page 1 of 2 

 
NOPSA SAFETY ALERT 14 cont’d 

 

• 

• 

Consequently, a Prohibition Notice was issued to prevent use of the FRC in its current 
configuration.  Work restrictions were also introduced by the operator to minimise the man 
overboard risk. 

 
What went wrong? 
The review conducted under the Management of Change (MoC) process did not 
adequately identify the potential for new risks to be introduced during launching and 
retrieval of the FRC.  These new risks were only identified during a subsequent JSA after 
the FRC was put in place on the facility. 

When changes are made quickly to fulfil an immediate need, those changes are often not 
subjected to adequate scrutiny prior to the change being made. 

 
Key Lessons: 
• 

The use of temporary replacements for safety-critical equipment, such as an FRC, 
should be thoroughly reviewed through a MoC process prior to the change being 
made to ensure new hazards, resulting in unacceptable risks, are not introduced. 

A single layer of risk controls is generally not sufficient to adequately address 
identified hazards, especially when the controls are either procedural or awareness-
based in nature.  Preferably, there should be several layers of risk controls in place so 
that if one control measure fails, there are others in place to prevent the undesired 
consequences being realised. 

The hierarchy of controls should be considered when making changes with controls 
selected from as high as possible on the following list, where practicable: 

⇒  Eliminate 

⇒  Substitute 

⇒  Engineering Controls 

⇒  Administrative Controls 

⇒  Personal Protective Equipment 

Where elimination or substitution is not practicable, good design is the barrier most 
likely to succeed to prevent accidents.  For these systems to operate safely and with 
the confidence of those required to use them, they must be designed consistent with 
industry good practice. 

 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 14. 

Page 2 of 2 

