NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

SAFETY ALERT 16 

  

Control of Ignition Sources 

 
What happened? 
A contractor’s temporary workshop observed during a recent NOPSA inspection has 
highlighted the importance of correct use of permit to work system, appreciation of non-
certified electrical equipment as potential sources of ignition and the need to check 
temporary equipment before shipping and on arrival at a facility. 

A mobile Pressure Safety Valve (PSV) maintenance workshop was temporarily located 
in a laydown area above a well-bay, in a Zone II Hazardous Area, and near an operating 
gas lift compressor.  The workshop had non-certified electrical light fittings, domestic 
type power outlets and a grinder with a non-certified motor. 

Non-Ex electrical fittings are as indicated  

Non-Ex electrical fittings and a grinder 

 

A general work permit had been issued for the PSV maintenance work and included a 
requirement to use a portable gas detector, which was placed near the entrance to the 
container. 

The issue of non-hazardous area rated equipment being used in and around the 
workshop was raised with the operator and the operator immediately disconnected all 
non-certified electrical equipment and fitted an ExN certified light fitting and two portable 
gas monitors.  Use of the grinder in its current location was prohibited. 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

SAFETY ALERT 16 

  

Control of Ignition Sources 

 
What went wrong? 
Investigation found that although the operator had specified the use of equipment 
suitable for use in hazardous areas, the operator failed to ensure that the PSV workshop 
was suitable. It was put into service without an electrical inspection against the 
specification or an appropriate risk assessment. 

There was a lack of appreciation for non-certified equipment to act as potential ignition 
sources, and their introduction together with other potential sources of ignition such as 
grinders, should necessitate more stringent risk mitigation and control measures 
normally stipulated under a Hot Work Permit.  

During periods when the workshop was unoccupied or after shift working hours there 
was no mechanism in place to respond to a gas detection alarm. 

 
Key Lessons: 
• 

Temporary workshops and equipment should be checked before shipping to the 
facility, upon arrival, and then on a regular basis during project work, to ensure that 
equipment is as specified and remains suitable for its intended purpose. 

Any introduction of potential ignition sources into hazardous areas should require a 
Hot Work Permit and only be authorised after a thorough review of the hazards and 
risks through a Job Safety Analysis (JSA), or equivalent, has ensured control 
measures will reduce the risks to ALARP.  The use of a general work permit in this 
case did not lead to appropriate controls being implemented. 

The lack of recognition of non-certified electrical equipment and grinders as 
potential sources of ignition in hazardous areas can lead to inadequate control 
measures and unacceptable risks. 

 
Contact 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 16. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

• 

• 

Page 2 of 2 

 

