SAFETY ALERT 28

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Safety Alert: Failure to avoid a cyclone

What happened?

Recently, a construction vessel was unable to avoid a cyclone because 
the operator failed to initiate preparations to retrieve anchors and 

evacuate its location in a timely manner.

A tropical low formed 250 nautical miles from the location of the vessel 

and, inconsistent with the predicted forecast track, approached the 
vessel. The weather deteriorated and the high winds and seas halted 

operations to retrieve the anchors, attach tow lines and tow the vessel 
away from its location to avoid the course of the tropical low which 

formed into a cyclone. 

The vessel weathered the storm until its final anchor parted, at which 

point the vessel was able to make way under its own limited capability 
to a safe location. Fortunately no one was injured during the incident, 

although had the cyclone intensified in strength, the outcome could 
well have been more serious.  

The incident took place in the Timor Sea, an area sometimes known as 
the cyclone "nursery" because cyclones typically form there from 

tropical low pressure systems before heading toward the North West 
Shelf. On the North West Shelf, sometimes known as cyclone "alley,"

it is typically easier to predict the track of cyclones than in the Timor 
Sea, as they are already established by the time they get to the North 

West Shelf.

What went wrong?

The factors that contributed to the late decision to evacuate include:

1. Lack of adequate planning for location specific risks and anticipated 

cyclone scenarios. 

2. Lack of consideration for operational limitations of support vessels with 

critical roles during their cyclone response.

3. Failure of the Cyclone Response Procedure (CRP) to identify and 

address the risk of tropical lows rapidly developing into cyclones 

Page 1 of 3

SAFETY ALERT 28

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Safety Alert: Failure to avoid a cyclone

4. Inappropriate planning of the required evacuation task times with an 

adequate safety margin.

5. Failure to consider worst case cyclone track scenario of weather 

6. Failure of the operator to conduct adequate cyclone response drills and 

forecasts.    

exercises. 

Key Lessons:

1. Consideration of location specific cyclone scenarios is critical in the 

Cyclone Response Procedure (CRP), including;

o Designated safe mooring areas 

o Escape route/sail away restrictions

o Responses for Cyclones/tropical lows approaching from various 

directions.  

o Helicopter availability

preparation times    

o Key construction activities and their required evacuation 

2. Clear and concise instructions and required actions should be 

contained in the CRP

3. The CRP must identify the time required to complete critical tasks prior 

to sail away, with an adequate safety margin   

4. The consideration of operational limitations of support vessels required 

to perform key roles during the emergency response is critical. 

Evaluation of their required time to complete their functions, against 

worsening weather conditions is essential   

5. The CRP should identify and address the risk of tropical lows rapidly 

6. Worst case cyclone tracking and forecast predictions should be taken 

7. This incident highlights the importance of drills and exercises - practice 

developing into cyclones

into consideration 

makes perfect!

Page 2 of 3

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Safety Alert: Failure to avoid a cyclone

SAFETY ALERT 28

Tropical cyclone images: (left) from the Bureau of Meteorology and the National Oceanographic & 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) ; (right) Cyclone Thelma  image originally processed by the Bureau of 
Meteorology from the geostationary GOES-9 operated by the NOAA for the Japan Meteorological Agency. 

Contact

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 28

Page 3 of 3

