  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 12, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 15-14 
 

ACCIDENTAL RELEASE OF CO2 SYSTEM! 

IMPORTANCE OF DESIGN AND TESTING OF EMERGENCY SYSTEM CONTROLS 

 
This  safety  alert  serves  to  remind  shoreside  and  vessel  personnel  of  the  importance  of  1)  designing  and 
maintaining emergency systems to be logical and easily operated in high stress situations, 2) maintaining a 
high  level  of  crew  familiarity  with  emergency  systems,  and  3)  exercising  safeguards  during  testing  to 
mitigate the risk of human error or system malfunction.  Although regulations prescribe standards for safety 
systems aboard vessels, installations particularly those onboard uninspected vessels, can vary dramatically.   
 
During a recent Uninspected Towing Vessel (UTV) exam, a vessel crewmember intending to test the fuel oil 
shut-off cables instead pulled the CO2 system release cables.  As seen in photos directly below and at the 
end of this safety alert, the emergency control panel used during the incident contained pull cables for both 
the CO2 system and fuel oil shut-offs.   
 
Accidental releases are not uncommon and vessel crewmember and Coast Guard inspector fatalities have 
occurred  in  the  past.    Fortunately,  in  this  instance  the  audible  alarm  system  and  release  time  delay 
functioned as intended, allowing all personnel to safely evacuate the machinery spaces prior to discharge. 
 

Poor design characteristics: 
 
Similar  activation  pulls  were  collocated 
for fuel and CO2 systems.  Fuel oil shut 
down  signage  was  located  on  the  left, 
but fuel oil pulls were located on the far 
right with three CO2 pulls in between. 
   

 

 

In a separate recent UTV examination, an inspector found two sets of 
remote  emergency  shutdowns  with  only  one  set  operational.    The 
original  station  (see  image  on  the  right)  appears  to  be  fully 
operational, but was not connected.  The operational shutdowns were 
at a separate location.  
 
Crew interactions with emergency systems often occur during periods 
of  increased  stress  (e.g.,  a  compliance  exam,  drill,  or  an  actual 
emergency).    System  design,  proper  human  engineering,  labeling, 
and detailed training will substantially reduce the risk of human error.   
 

 

DISCONNECTED 

SYSTEM! 

 

  Safety Alert 15-14 

 
 
 
The Coast Guard recommends conducting a comprehensive pre-test meeting and simulated step-by-step 
“walk-through” between involved parties prior to actual testing of complex or potentially confusing systems.  
Operational controls should be implemented to maximize safety and reduce risk. 
 
Furthermore,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  reminds  all  maritime  operators  of  the  importance  in  performing 
regular  vessel  specific  emergency  drills  and  to  ensure  that  all  crewmembers  have  the  proper  knowledge, 
skills, and abilities to respond to any potential emergency.   
 
UTV  regulations  in  46  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  (CFR)  27.209  require  all  crewmembers  to  be  familiar 
with  the  location  and  operation  of  engine  room  fuel-shutoffs  and  fire  extinguishing  equipment.    All 
credentialed  mariners  are  required  by  46  CFR  15.405  to  be  familiar  with  firefighting  and  lifesaving 
equipment.  Additionally, Coast Guard guidance on CO2 system safety and is available at:   
http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/nvic/2000s.asp#2000 . 
 
Remember: 

•  Emergency  systems  should  be  designed  with  human  factors  in  mind  -  logically  understood  and 

easily operated during high stress situations. 

 
•  System training will provide the familiarity needed during an emergency. 
  
•  Pre-test  coordination  and  review  of  procedures  will  minimize  accidental  and  potentially  fatal 

discharges. 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirements.    It  was  developed  by  the  Coast  Guard  Towing 
Vessel Center of Expertise and Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  For questions or concerns 
please visit the Towing Vessel National Center of Expertise web site (www.uscg.mil/TVNCOE) and click on 
the  “About  Us”  tab  under  TVNCOE  Home  for  contact  information  or  send  an  e-mail  to  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Casualty Analysis at: hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 
 

 

CO2 pulls: 
 
To main engine manifold - Top Left 
To main engine room - Center 
To generator room manifold - Bottom Left 
 
Fuel Oil valve stops: 
 
To main engines - Top Right 
To generators - Bottom Right 

 

 

2 

CO2 ACTIVATIONS     F.O. STOPS 

