 
 
 
 
 
 
May 22, 2017 
Washington, DC                             

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 05-17 

Don’t allow corrective actions to create additional hazardous conditions! 

Got Gas? In the Wrong Place? 

 

Recently  Coast  Guard  Port  State  Control  Officers  performed  an  examination  on  board  a  Liquefied 
Natural  Gas  (LNG)  carrier.    While  onboard  the  inspectors  discovered  a  significant  and  potentially 
dangerous  modification  within  a  Gas  Valve  Unit  (GVU)  room.    This  room  is  located  within  the 
machinery space of the dual fuel, diesel-electric propelled vessel.  These engines can burn petroleum 
oil  or  LNG  in  gaseous  form.    The  GVU  is  a  multi-component  device  which  manages  the  liquefied 
natural  gas  pressure  supplied  to  the  propulsion  engines.  The  GVU  room  has  an  air  intake  and 
exhaust system designed to continuously ventilate and exchange the air within the space to reduce 
fire, explosion, and hazardous atmosphere risks from developing if gas leaks should occur from the 
equipment.  The atmosphere of the room is monitored by a catalytic methane sensor located near the 
inlet to the room’s ventilation exhaust trunk. The GVU room’s ventilation creates a vacuum within the 
room when the two access doors are shut. 
 
External  to  the  GVU  room  the  gas  supply  piping  to  the  main  engines  is  double  walled  including 
through  manifolds  and  expansion  bellows  all  the  way  to  each  cylinder.    The  purpose  of  this  double 
walled construction is to contain any leakage of gas and return it back to the GVU room via a small 
gas evacuation fan assembly.  The discharge outlet of the gas evacuation fan is simply an opening in 
the bulkhead of the GVU room.  The system is designed so that any gas entering the outer wall of the 
piping  gets  drafted  to  the  GVU  room  and  exits  via  the  exhaust  duct  after  passing  by  the  methane 
sensor. 
 
During  a  repair  on  one  cylinder  of  a  main  engine  vessel,  engineers  had  to  remove  an  expansion 
bellows.    Upon  replacement  of  the  bellows  an  O-ring,  separating  its  inner  and  outer  sections,  was 
damaged.  This error went unnoticed until a crew member was making a round in the enclosed GVU 
room while the engine had been operating on gas.  After entering the GVU room he was overcome by 
methane gas and nearly lost consciousness.  Fortunately, he was able to exit the space into a safe 
atmosphere.  After the incident the GVU room atmosphere was  measured to be 22%  methane and 
17%  oxygen  by  volume.    Methane  is  an  asphyxiant  which 
displaces  oxygen  and  is  extremely  flammable.    The 
installed methane sensor failed to detect the accumulation 
of gas despite not having malfunctioned.  
 
Engineers  traced  the  methane  leakage  to  the  recently 
removed  bellows  and  replaced  the  damaged  O-ring.    To  
prevent  future  accumulation  of  gases  they  rigged  a    hose 
from the outlet of the gas evacuation fan, across the GVU 
room  to  the  sensor  at  the  entrance  exhaust  duct.    This 
unauthorized  arrangement,  which  was  identified  during  a 
Coast  Guard  examination,  could  have  likely  disabled  the 
sensor’s  ability  to  detect  methane  leakages  from  other 
components within the GVU room.   (See image at right.) 
 

            Exhaust Duct Opening 
 
 
 Methane Sensor 
 
 
 
 
 
Hose from discharge of gas 
evacuation fan. 

Safety Alert 05-17 

 

The causal factors in this case include: 

•  an inadequate fix of a component leading to the dislodging of an O-ring; 
•  gas leakage captured and returned back to the GVU room but not removed from the room; 
•  an  accidental  exposure  /  personnel  casualty  caused  by  a  lack  of  oxygen  and  excessive  gas 

accumulation; and 

•  a  second  potentially  hazardous  condition  due  to  the  unapproved  installation  of  the  exhaust 
hose,  which  would  likely  disable  the  methane  sensor’s  effectiveness  in  monitoring  other 
components for leaks within the GVU room.   

 
Coast Guard examiners also noted that a second exhaust hose was similarly installed in the vessel’s 
second GVU room.  These hoses were in place for about eight years.  It is also important to note the 
engine manufacturer’s manual highlights the need for caution when replacing the bellows and to use 
care when installing the O-rings.  The manufacturer also emphasizes the need to check for gas leaks 
after repairs or maintenance are performed. 
 
As a result of this discovery, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners and operators in 
all  segments  of  the  maritime  industry  with  a  special  emphasis  on  conventional  LNG  fueled  vessels 
and Liquefied Gas Carriers: 
 

•  Emphasize to their organization’s technical shore side and vessel personnel the importance of 

following: 
 

o  Manufacture guidance; 
o  Recommendations in terms of maintenance and repair procedures;  
o  Methods  to  validate  successful  repairs  involving  critical  systems,  including  leakage 

detection; and 

o  Procedures  to  evaluate  corrective  modifications  (e.g.,  the  use  of  the  exhaust  hose), 
even if intended to be temporary, to ensure they do not create additional safety hazards.   
 

•  Urge their vessel personnel to request additional expertise such as classification societies and 
manufacturer  representatives  when  technical  issues  arise  (e.g.,  the  failure  of  the  GVU  room 
sensor to detect gas leakage or potential inadequate diffusion and circulation of air exchanges 
within  the  GVU  room)  to  ensure  the  most  effective  corrective  actions  and  system  alterations 
take place as needed. 

 

•  Make  notifications  to  the  proper  Flag  State  authorities  and  classification  societies  regarding 
potentially  hazardous  conditions  before  making  any  modifications  to  existing  approved 
installations, arrangements, or proceedures. 

 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  to  Flag  States,  classification  societies,  underwriters  and 
insurers  that  respective  examiners,  surveyors,  and  inspection  personnel  maintain  an  acute 
awareness  regarding  any  system  modifications,  whether  deemed  potentially  hazardous  or  not,  to 
ensure such modifications have received the proper engineering reviews, approvals, and supporting 
documentation. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  Sector  Boston  Prevention, 
LNG  SME,  Liquefied  Gas  Carrier  National  Center  of  Expertise  (LGC  NCOE)  and  Coast  Guard 
Headquarters  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis,  Washington  DC.    Questions  may  be 
sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

