 

         

 
 
December 15, 2010 
Washington, DC 

TYPE I PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE STRAP CHECK 

 

 

 

   Alert 09-10 

 
Recent  Coast  Guard  inspections  of  Type  I  Personal  Flotation  Devices, 
(PFDs) in both adult and child size, identified a potential hazard that could 
prevent  proper  donning  in  the  event  of  an  emergency.    The  chest  strap 
was threaded through the fixed “D” ring that the strap is intended to clip to 
when worn.  (Image left) 
 
It  was  discovered  that  several  PFDs  were  assembled  this  way  at  the 
factory and if not corrected could create a hazardous condition during an 
emergency when they are donned. 
 
Instead of the strap falling away, allowing the wearer to wrap it around him 
or her, the clip end of the strap could snag in the “D” ring preventing the 
wearer from getting it around their body. (Following image) 
 
(PFDs  shown  on  this  page  are  for  example  purposes  only  and  are  not  Kent 
models.) 

 
 
 
Manufacturer,  Models  and  Lot  Numbers  known  to  be 
affected: 
 
Kent  Adult  Model  8830 
160.055/184/0) in Lot 53W manufactured in October 2006 
 
Kent  Child  Model  8820 
160.055/150/0) in Lot 012T manufactured in March 2008 
 

(USCG  Approval  Number 

(USCG  Approval  Number 

The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  vessel 
owners/operators  using  the  PFDs  listed  above  check  each 
lifejacket for proper routing of the strap. Completely unwrap 
the  primary  strap  to  ensure  it  is  free  and  capable  of  being 
adjusted for any wearer. The strap of the lifejacket must not 
be  threaded  through  the  fixed  “D”  ring.    If  routing  is 
satisfactory,  the  strap  may  be  wrapped  around  the  life 
jacket  and  clipped  to  the  fixed  “D”  ring  for  storage.  (Right 
image)    If  the  strap  is  incorrectly  threaded  through  the  fixed 
“D”  ring,  the  snap  hook  assembly  should  be  carefully 
removed from the strap, the strap pulled out of the fixed “D” 
ring, and the snap hook assembly re-attached. 
 

Snag at “D” ring 

.

 
 
Vessel owners/operators are also encouraged as part of general preventative maintenance to verify 
that  all  their  PFDs  are  in  fully  serviceable  condition  with  an  inspection  of  the  straps,  components, 
fabric and flotation material.  Any significant deterioration in condition or poorly functioning hardware 
indicates a replacement is necessary. 
 
Please  contact  the  manufacturer  representative  at  the  address  below  if  additional  information  is 
needed.    
 

Kent Sporting Goods Co. 
433 Park Avenue S. 
New London, OH 44851 
Mr. Wayne Walters 
Phone: (706) 769-1682)  
E-mail: WWalters@kentwatersports.com 

 
Developed by the United States Coast Guard Headquarters Lifesaving and Fire Safety Division with 
assistance from the Office of Investigations and Analysis.  Questions may be addressed to Mr. Martin 
L. Jackson: Martin.L.Jackson@uscg.mil. or 202.372.1391. 
 
 
      
 
 
 
           
 

Incorrect 
Routing 

Kent Sporting Goods Lifejackets Shown Above 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

