 

 
 
 
 
January 9, 2014  
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

   Alert 01-14 

Offshore Sailing 

 

You must be prepared. 
In  a  recent  offshore  regatta,  numerous  sailboats  experienced 
steering  system  and  other  failures  which  required  assistance 
and/or  rescue  by  the  U.  S.  Coast  Guard  when  a  weather 
system  stalled  offshore  creating  higher  than  expected  sea 
states and winds. The Coast Guard responded using an array 
of assets to render assistance.   
 
Offshore  sailing  requires  special  knowledge,  skills,  and 
abilities. 
  Vessel  equipment  and  components  must  be 
thoroughly  checked  before  getting  underway  and  periodically 
while  at  sea.    The  offshore  domain’s  remoteness  adds  a 
negative dynamic to survivability concerns.  Preparation is key 
to minimizing misfortune. 
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that owner / operators of offshore sailboats ensure proper 
maintenance and repair of their critical mechanical systems to reduce the possibility of failure during 
stressed operating conditions. 
 

(cid:57)  Operational limitations of the systems must be understood. 
(cid:57)  Sailors should have the repair manuals associated with their important propulsion and steering 

systems onboard and be able to detect oncoming failures and perform emergency repairs. 

(cid:57)  Adequate tools, hardware, and an array of fasteners should be kept onboard. 
(cid:57)  Common spare parts that are known to fail on a particular system should be kept onboard.  
(cid:57)  If  mechanical  ability  is  lacking,  additional  training  should  be  taken  to  provide  minimum  skill 

sets. 

(cid:57)  Regular  inspection  and  prompt  corrective  action  of  all  steering  gear  components  including 
linkages, ram assemblies, controls and cables, in addition to engine systems, should be part of 
getting underway and day-to-day operations. 

(cid:57)  Equipment  should  be  tested  before  getting  underway,  noting  variations  in  movement,  feel, 

sound, and resistance. 

(cid:57)  Flooding and damage control kits should be kept onboard. 
(cid:57)  Sailors  should  contemplate  and  envision  ways  to  fabricate  a  temporary  emergency  rudder 

using components (table tops, cabinet doors, spinnaker poles, etc.) already onboard.  

(cid:57)  Make sure all EPIRBs, PLBs, are registered, operational and available. Ensure your VHF radio 

is fully functional. 

(cid:57)  Lastly, always file a float plan with family or friends ashore  before getting underway.  Float 
plans  are  simple  tools  that  help  rescuers  locate  stranded  boaters  in  distress,  and  may  be 
printed from the following site: http://www.floatplancentral.org/download/USCGFloatPlan.pdf 

 
This alert is for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international safety, 
operational, or material requirement.  Developed by the Fifth Coast Guard District, Portsmouth, VA.  
Questions  may  be  addressed  to  LCDR  Ken  Morton,  (757)  398-6284,  or  may  be  forwarded  to  D05-
DG-Prevention-DPI-PFB-Staff@uscg.mil.     ******* 

