 

 

 

 

July 24, 2018   
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                 Safety Alert 12-18 

Hazards of Parasail & Watersport Passenger Transfers  

 

Recently,  on  two  separate  occasions,  passengers  on 
uninspected parasail vessels were seriously injured during 
underway transfer from the vessel to an inflatable raft, (i.e., 
“banana boat”) that was being towed alongside the vessel 
by  personal  water  craft  (“Jet  Ski”).  During  both  incidents, 
the  parasail  vessel  continued 
to  make  way  during 
passenger  transfer  to  the  inflatable  raft.  One  incident 
resulted in double-leg amputation of the passenger and the 
other  resulted  in  hip  fracture.  In  the  first  incident,  the 
passenger became trapped under both the raft and parasail 
vessel and was struck by the parasail vessel’s propeller.   
 
Although the investigation continues and the causal factors 
are still being identified, the failure of the operators to put the engine transmission in neutral likely contributed to 
both casualties. Putting the engine transmission in neutral would have required the parasail chute be deflated, 
increasing the time before the next launch.  
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends parasail and watersport vessel owners/operators take immediate steps 
to detail safety orientations for passengers and instructions for crew to include comprehensive written guidance 
for all aspects of the underway transfer of passengers from the vessel to a raft and vice-versa, specifically: 

•  detailed procedures focused on passenger safety during transfers;  
• 
•  unless a hazardous operating condition would result, requirements to deflate the chute before transferring 

roles and responsibilities of crew during passenger transfers; 

passengers; and, 

•  unless a hazardous operating condition would result, requirements to stop the rotating propeller of the 

parasail vessel by placing the engine in neutral during passenger transfers. 

 
Furthermore, USCG-credentialed mariners are strongly reminded of their obligation to remain in control of their 
vessel  at  all  times.    Vessel  operators  and  crewmembers  are  required  to  report  hazardous  conditions  (e.g., 
parasail towline failures, falls overboard) and other potentially unsafe practices, as outlined in Navigation and 
Vessel Inspection Circular (NVIC) 01-15.  
 
The  Coast  Guard  has  engaged  with  industry  trade  groups,  such  as  the  Water  Sports  Industry  Association 
(WSIA), to study and discuss best practices for the underway transfer of passengers from parasail and watersport 
vessels.  
 
This Safety Alert is provided for information purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety,  operational,  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Sector  Charleston  Investigations  Division  and 
Detached Duty Office Myrtle Beach. Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis. Questions may be 
sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CGF-INV@uscg.mil. 

