 
 
 
 
June 8, 2009                                                                                                                      Alert 02-09 
Washington, DC 

Compact Fluorescent Lights 

This  Safety  Alert  serves  to  inform  the  maritime  industry  that  energy  saving  Compact  Fluorescent 
Lights (CFL) or lighting, sometimes known as radio frequency (RF) lighting devices may interfere with 
certain communications equipment. CFLs employ a RF lighting device to excite a gas inside a bulb in 
order to produce light.  
 
The  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  recognized  the  need  for  and  adopted  rules  to 
control  the  harmful  interference  to  radio  communications  services  from  these  devices.  During  the 
rulemaking  process  the  Coast  Guard  provided  comments  and  recommended  an  advisory  label  for 
CFLs / RF lighting devices warning users about potential interference to communication services and 
particularly with respect to devices capable of producing emissions in the 0.45-30 MHz band.  As a 
result,  the  FCC  required  manufacturers  of  CFLs  to  provide  an  advisory  statement,  either  on  the 
product packaging or with other user documentation, similar to the following: "This product may cause 
interference 
installed  near  maritime  safety 
communications  equipment  or  other  critical  navigation  or  communication  equipment  operating 
between 0.45-30 MHz."  
 
The Coast Guard has learned that CFLs have been installed on the navigation bridges of vessels and 
in  other  places  capable  of  causing  radio  communications  interference.    Marine  inspectors,  vessel 
owners  and  operators  should  be  aware  of  this  potential  safety  hazard  and  take  proper  action  as 
needed. 
 
Below are examples of some compact fluorescent lights with different shapes and sizes.   
 

to  radio  communications  and  should  not  be 

 

 

   
 
 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Office of Domestic Vessel 
Activities (CG-5431), United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.   
 
                                                                        ******* 
 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

