Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Safety Alert 05-18 
 

 

May 10, 2018  
Washington, DC 

Seeking What You Don’t Know May Reduce Your Risks! 

Consider implementing an internal reporting system. 

 

This  safety  alert  reminds  owners  and  operators  of  all  commercial  vessels  of  the  importance  of 
developing  and  maintaining  organizational-wide  internal  reporting  systems.    The  purpose  of  such  a 
reporting system is to allow vessel employees at any level to anonymously report, when desired, issues 
related  to  vessel  material  safety,  operational  safety  and  environmental  compliance.    The  reporting 
systems must operate with a non-retaliation policy, which explains that the organization will not retaliate 
against any employee who, in good faith, reports a potential violation.  Reporting policy should dictate 
that  all  company  officials  know  that  any  attempt  at  retaliation  against  an  employee  who  uses  the 
reporting system or engages in any kind of whistleblowing would result in immediate disciplinary action.  
Without  such  a  policy,  employees  and  others  will  likely  be  hesitant  to  report  potential  problems 
internally.  This non-retaliation policy is critical if your reporting system is to be effective. 
 
Organizational reporting systems are managed internally or by a third party. 
They  may  use  email,  web  based,  telephone  hotline  and  other  reporting 
methods or combinations thereof to facilitate submission of reports from a 
vessel  or  fleet.    Essential  to  the  success  of  such  systems  is  employee 
training on the hotline process; what happens after the complaint; retaliation 
and  its  handling;  when  to  use  the  hotline;  and  types  of  issues  to  report.  
Senior vessel  personnel and  shore  side managers  have  to be  trained on 
handling  reports  raised  directly  to  them  and  on  the  prohibition  against 
retaliation. 
 
Occasionally, such reporting systems fail and are underutilized.  Reasons for why such system fail are 
associated with the following: 

  Employee lack of awareness of the resource or how to contact it; 
  Fear of reprisal if they use it; 
  A lack of faith that something will be done with a report; 
  Fear due to lack of understanding of the hotline process; and 
  Preference to use management as the resource for raising issues and asking questions. 

 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and  operators  consider  the  value  of 
implementing reporting systems recognizing that such reporting can assist them in remaining compliant 
with various domestic and international requirements.  Reporting will allow the Owner and Operator to 
become knowledgeable of issues related vessel material safety, operational safety and environmental 
concerns.  This additional awareness allows management control and may reduce the impact of costs 
associated with repairs, environmental penalties, injuries and other circumstances before they become 
problematic to the Owner and Operator. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international  safety, 
operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis, 
Washington DC.  Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

