  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2003  (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

FLOATING ELECTRIC WATERLIGHT SAFETY 

Don’t get lost in the dark! 

      Safety Alert 06-03 
 

Recently the following problems have been reported regarding Floating Electric Waterlights:  

• 

Installation of incorrect replacement batteries which cause the waterlights to sink (batteries 
too heavy).  
Improperly installed batteries and missing flotation foam.  
Installation into a bracket not designed for that waterlight (will not properly release).  

• 
• 
•  Lanyard deterioration due to sun damage.  
•  Not using a Coast Guard Approved Floating Electric Waterlight when required.  

46  CFR  161.010-2  requires  that  floating  electric  waterlights  meet  the  requirements  of  UL  1196, 
which  includes  float  testing,  bracket  release  testing  and  labeling.  Though  laboratory  re-testing  is 
not typically required after a model has been approved, waterlights must be properly maintained to 
retain  the  required  characteristics.  Clearly  a  waterlight  that  sinks  is  not  able  to  fulfill  its  purpose. 
Waterlight owners should pay close attention to manufacturers' instructions, particularly regarding 
battery replacement.  

General Information:  

•  Floating Electric Waterlight approval information is contained in 46 CFR 161.010  
•  Testing  is  carried  out  by  a  Coast  Guard  Accepted  Independent  Laboratory  upon  initial 

certification of a model of waterlight. (approved laboratory list)  

•  A  list  of  approved  waterlights  may  be  found  by  selecting  "FLOATING  ELECTRIC  WATER 
LIGHT" in the Approval Series field of the Search page at the USCG Maritime Information 
Exchange.  

•  Waterlights that have met the additional SOLAS requirements are listed under "FLOATING 

ELECTRIC WATER LIGHT (SOLAS)" at the USCG Maritime Information Exchange.  

Please  address  any  questions  or  reports  of  Floating  Electric  Waterlight  problems  to  your  local 
Marine Safety Office, or LT Patrick Nelson at: (202)267-0027, psnelson@comdt.uscg.mil  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

