 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 6, 2007                                                                                                                               Alert 2-07 
Washington, DC 
 

Programming Marine Radio and AIS Equipment 

 
Statistics  show  that  many  mariners  in  distress  do  not  properly  identify  themselves  nor  provide  a 
precise location when radioing for help which delays rescue services in arriving at the scene quickly 
and providing the assistance needed.  Many marine communication devices, including marine radios 
equipped with Digital Selective Calling (DSC) and Automatic Identification Systems (AIS) equipment 
rely  upon  a  9-digit  Maritime  Mobile  Service  Identity  (MMSI)  number  to  identify  itself  and  more 
importantly the user of the device.    
 
The U.S. Coast Guard and the National GMDSS Task Force1 is concerned that many users of these 
devices  are  not  obtaining,  registering  and/or  properly  entering  their  assigned  MMSI  into  these 
devices.  Lack of an MMSI will make some of these devices inoperable, such as AIS, or incapable of 
operating  advanced  features2  or    distress  alerting  capabilities  of  the  device.    Leaving  the  MMSI 
unprogrammed,  entering  a  false  identity  or  not  updating  a  previously-programmed  device  with  your 
own identity may delay a rescue and under certain situations is unlawful. 
 
MMSI  use  and  registration  greatly  assists  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  in  responding  to  an  alert  since  it 
contains  a  description  of  the  vessel  and  telephone  numbers  used  to  contact  the  vessel’s  owner  or 
point  of  contact  in  an  emergency.  MMSI  numbers  are  issued  by  the  FCC  if  the  vessel  requires  a 
Station  License,  otherwise  they  can  be  obtained  from  Boat  U.S.  (www.boatus.com/mmsi), Sea Tow 
(www.seatow.com/boating_safety/mmsi), and Shine Micro (www.shinemicro.com) often at no charge.  
Those  having  MMSIs  should  keep  registration  information  current,  including  phone  numbers, 
address, name and type of boat. 
 
Most  new  marine  radios  have  a  special  Distress  Alerting  Capability  that  will,  upon  the  touch  of  a 
button,  transmit  a  distress  message  which  can  include  its  identity  (MMSI)  and  location—only  if  the 
radio  has  been  programmed  with  a  MMSI  and  is  connected  to  a  electronic  positioning  system  (e.g. 
GPS, LORAN).   The Coast Guard recommends DSC-equipped VHF radios for all mariners because 
of these capabilities.   
 
 

                                                 
1 The Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS) Task Force was created by the Coast Guard to assist the government 
in implementing this new global radio safety system.  The GMDSS Task Force is sponsored by the Radio Technical Commission for 
Maritime Services (RTCM).  This safety alert is directed primarily to organizations and media which cater to Recreational Vessels 
and small Commercial Vessels. 
2  In  addition  to  the  distress  alerting  capability,  DSC  radios  have  the  ability  to  make  routine  calls  amongst  each  other,  usually  by 
entering the other radio's MMSI and touching the transmit button.  Once the two radios have connected, they automatically switch to a 
communication  channel  so  that  a  conversation  can  take  place.    This  is  all  done  without  having  to  hail  by  a  voice  call  and/or  use 
channel 16.  
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Task Force is also on record recommending that all vessels going as much as one mile offshore 
should carry a VHF radio (preferably DSC) and if exceeding VHF range (20-30 miles) should carry a 
406  MHz  Emergency  Position  Indicating  Radio  Beacon  (EPIRB)  or  a  406  MHz  Personal  Locater 
Beacon (PLB) which can be detected by search and rescue satellites almost anywhere in the world. 
 
Coast  Guard’s  Rescue  21  Project  is  Upgrading  the  Coastal  Network  for  DSC  Reception.  The 
Coast Guard has implemented an extensive project to fill gaps in its VHF coastal radio coverage and 
to upgrade the system for DSC operation. Rescue 21 is currently operational in portions of the Pacific 
Northwest, Gulf of Mexico, Florida, and the East coast. Vessels with DSC capability should not delay 
obtaining, registering, and/or properly entering their assigned MMSI into their radios while Rescue 21 
coverage  is  increased.    There  is  already  an  extensive  watch  on  the  DSC  calling  channel  by  other 
vessels who can relay alerts to the Coast Guard. 

Visit these websites (or email) for additional information: 

AIS, DSC, GMDSS at www.navcen.uscg.gov/marcomms (CGComms@uscg.mil) 
Global Maritime Distress and Safety System Task Force at (gmdss@comcast.net) 
Rescue 21 at http://www.uscg.mil/rescue21/home 
RTCM at www.rtcm.org (info@rtcm.org)    

This material is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any existing domestic or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. 

 

 

