 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                 Safety Alert 15-18 

October 3, 2018 
Washington, DC                                   Don’t Let Your Divers Down! 
 
In the summer of 2012 the Coast Guard released a safety  advisory (included here) with a focus on fatalities 
associated with passenger vessels in support of recreational diving activities.  The attached advisory reiterates 
the responsibilities of licensed Masters operating passenger vessels associated with recreational diving.   
 
Due  to  steady  numbers  of  casualties  each  year,  we  remind  owners  and  operators  of  these  vessels  that 
recreational diving is not an activity regulated by the Coast Guard.  It is imperative to remember that the USCG 
licensed Master of a commercial vessel transporting recreational divers and passengers is ultimately responsible 
and  accountable  for  vessel  and  passenger  safety.    Failure  to  adequately  perform  those  duties  may  lead  to 
administrative actions against the Master. 
 
Masters of a commercial vessel used for recreational diving are responsible1 to ensure: 

•  Clear and effective safety briefings are made before getting underway; 
•  Safe transit of passengers to and from dive sites; 
•  Safe entry and exiting of divers from water at dive sites; 
•  Safe recovery of persons from water during routine and emergency circumstances; 
•  Safe “accounting” of divers at all times and managing role calls prior to dive-site departure; 
•  Proper care of vessels mechanical systems, emergency equipment and watertight integrity at all times, 

•  Proper  maintenance  and  inspection  of  diving  equipment  when  those  items  are  part  of  the  vessel’s 

especially prior to getting underway; 

equipment; 

•  Adequacy and effectiveness of marine crew or deckhands in the performance of their duties; 
•  Effective  monitoring  of  sea  state  and  weather  conditions  prior  to  getting  underway  and  at  all  times 

thereafter until vessel returns safely to dock; and 

 
Masters of a commercial vessel used for recreational diving who are also acting as a Dive Masters are 
responsible2 to ensure: 

•  Effective supervision of non-training related diving activities by planning, organizing and directing dives; 
•  Accurate assessment of the hazards of a dive site and ensuring diver awareness of those hazards; 
•  Divers are properly briefed on the layout and points of interest of the dive site; 
•  Suggestions for dive routes at a specific site for autonomous divers; 
•  Thorough checks of divers into and out of the water from the vessel; and 
•  Safely of divers in the water when leading a group as a tour guide. 

 
The Coast Guard recommends that all persons responsible for passenger vessels involved in dive activities 
review and adhere to the practices in the attached safety advisory.  Additional diver casualty data can be found 
here3.  
 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  information  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international  safety, 
operational, or material requirement. Developed jointly and distributed by the Investigations National Center of Excellence 
to  HQS-PF-fldr-CGF-INV@uscg.mil. 
and 
 
 

Investigations  and  Analysis.  Questions  may  be  sent 

the  Office  of 

“Don’t let safety happen by accident.” 

 

                                                            
1 Not intended to be inclusive of all responsibilities. 
2 Not intended to be inclusive of all responsibilities. 
3 https://www.diversalertnetwork.org/medical/report/AnnualDivingReport-2017Edition.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 21, 2012                                           
Washington, DC   
      

ASSISTANT COMMANDANT FOR PREVENTION POLICY 

 

 

                                     Advisory   01 -12 

Recommendations for Recreational Diving Operations  

Occurring from Commercial Passenger Vessels 

 

This  advisory  is  addressed  to  Passenger  Vessel  Operators,  Owners  and  Crewmembers  providing 
commercial  transport  and  support  services  to  recreational  divers,  and  reminds  them  of  safety 
responsibilities to themselves and their passengers.  Additionally, this advisory is intended to provide 
recommendations and lessons learned from recreational diving casualty investigations, and promote 
awareness of industry best practices. 
 
While  recreational  diving  is  not  regulated  by  the  Coast  Guard,  the  USCG  licensed  Master  of  a 
commercial  vessel  transporting  Divers  /  Passengers  is  ultimately  responsible  and  accountable  for 
vessel  and  passenger  safety.  Administrative  action  can  be  taken  against  an  operator  if  his  or  her 
unsafe actions or decisions lead to an injury or fatality.  
 
Due  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  fatalities  associated  with  passenger  vessels  supporting 
recreational  diving  activities,  the  Coast  Guard  believes  there  is  a  need  for  improved  safety  and 
performance in this area.  Accordingly, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that passenger vessel 
operators  performing  dive  site  transit  services  and  recreational  diving  operations  develop  and  use 
daily  operational  and  maintenance  procedures  that  cover  recreational  dive  evolutions  which  may 
include:  
 

(cid:190)  Loading and stowing dive gear; 
(cid:190)  Loading passengers; 
(cid:190)  Transiting to dive site; 
(cid:190)  Dive pre-brief and dive planning; 
(cid:190)  Knowing dive site specific risks and hazards; 
(cid:190)  Pre-dive equipment checks; 
(cid:190)  Entering water; 
(cid:190)  Boarding vessel; 
(cid:190)  Accounting for all divers; 
(cid:190)  Departing dive site; 
(cid:190)  Returning to port; 
(cid:190)  Unloading passengers; 
(cid:190)  Unloading gear; 
(cid:190)  Duties and responsibilities of crew members; and 
(cid:190)  Accounting for the safe return of all divers and passengers.  

 
Fueling, emergency, man-overboard, firefighting, evacuation and diver rescue / recovery procedures 
should be included. Each member of the organization should have access to the written procedures 
and be trained on them.  Owners and operators of a vessel providing dive equipment to passengers 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  Http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:  Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

should  maintain  equipment  as  required  by  the  equipment  manufacturer  and  keep  this  information 
together with a record of periodic inspections and tests performed. 
 
If the vessel provides a diving guide or dive master, or if one is provided by the excursion party, it is 
recommended that a planning and coordination meeting be held between all involved to ensure the 
highest  level  of  safety.    Additionally,  procedures  are  recommended  to  address  the  operator’s 
approved  range  of  operations  taking  into  account  the  operational  limitations  of  the  vessel,  the 
environmental  conditions  reasonably  expected,  the  number  and  experience  range  of  diving 
passengers, and the duration of a typical excursion. 
 
It  is  important  to  note  that  while  the  passenger  safety  orientation  requirements  in  46  CFR  185.506 
and  46  CFR  26.03-1  do  not  specifically  include  recreational  diving  topics,  it  is  considered  a  best 
practice to do so.  Additionally, it is recommended that the vessel operators account for the following 
prior to permitting the divers  to enter the water, regardless of the experience level of those involved: 
 

(cid:190)  Diver responsibilities; 
(cid:190)  Vessel and crewmember responsibilities; 
(cid:190)  Estimated time on site; 
(cid:190)  Dive site orientation and hazzards; 
(cid:190)  Communication procedures between submerged divers and vessel;  
(cid:190)  Emergency procedures for distressed or disabled divers; 
(cid:190)  General safety considerations unique to the vessel; and  
(cid:190)  Environmental conditions to be expected. 

 
Passenger  vessels  providing  commercial  transport  and  support  services  to  recreational  divers  may 
use  special  equipment  to  ensure  the  safety  of  passengers  such  as  rescue  points  for  distressed 
divers.    These  components  should  be  properly  maintained,  sufficiently  sized  and  strengthened  to 
support  all  personnel  involved  in  the  retrieval  of  a  distressed  or  incapacitated  diver.  Enhanced 
medical / first aid equipment, such as medical oxygen for injured divers may be carried onboard. This 
equipment should be inspected regularly to ensure it is adequate for service.  A logbook of inspection, 
maintenance, service, and repair should be kept for reference. 
  
The Coast Guard encourages Owners / Operators, industry experts and associations to work together 
to  develop  and  share  best  practices  for  passenger  vessels  providing  commercial  transport  and 
support services to recreational divers in order to minimize injuries and the potential  for fatalities.   
 
This  advisory  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international requirement.  This document was produced in collaboration with the Office of Operating 
and  Environmental  Standards,  Office  of  Commercial  Vessel  Compliance  and  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Analysis, U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC. 

 
 

******* 

 
 
 
 
 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  Http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:  Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

