 

                      

 
December 21, 2010 
Washington, DC 

 

 

   Alert 10(b)-10 

SIMPLE FAILURES RENDER CO2 SYSTEM INOPERATIVE 

 

Safety Alert 2 of 2 

 
This safety alert addresses concerns discovered during an ongoing marine casualty investigation and 
may be of interest to Ship Builders, Classification Societies, Owner / Operators and others involved 
with vessel operations. 
 
A  machinery  space  fire  onboard  a  relatively  new  vessel  was  effectively  responded  to  and 
extinguished by the vessel’s quick response team firefighters using portable extinguishing equipment.  
However, before it was declared completely extinguished and approximately five hours after the fire 
started, the master of the vessel made the decision to release CO2 from the vessel’s fixed firefighting 
system.    It  failed  to  operate  as  designed.  Subsequently,  crewmembers  were  unable  to  activate  it 
manually and CO2 was never directed into the machinery space.  
 
The following issues pertaining to the CO2 system were discovered.  
 
 

•  Numerous  piping  and  hose  connections  leaked 
extensively. When the system  was activated, on 
scene  video  taken  by  the  firefighters  showed 
numerous  leakages  into  the  CO2  room.    Post 
casualty, while pressure was still on the system, 
some  of  these  leaks  continued  even  after  the 
tightened.  (Photograph  at 
connections  were 
right.) 

•  The  zone  valve  for  the  aft  machinery  space 
which admits CO2 from the bottle bank manifold 
to the space failed.  Specifically, the ball valve’s 
opening actuating arm fell off the valve when the 
gas  powered  piston  actuator  attempted  to  move 
it.    The  ball  valve  actuating  arm  was  held  in 
place  by  a  very  small  machine  screw  and 
washer.  When firefighters attempted to open the 
valve  manually  using  the  provided  hardware  it 
could not be moved. The valve was only able to 
be  moved  after  the  gas  pressure  was  relieved 
from  the  inlet  side  of  the  valve.  (Photograph  at 
right.) 
 

1

 
 
 
 

 

•  Actuating arms to five of the six other zone valves 
were  found  loose.  They  were  also  attached  by 
small machine screws. (Photograph at right.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Hemp type pipe sealant was used extensively on 
pipe  threads  throughout  the  system  and  in  some 
instances  seems  to  have  entered  the  system. 
(Photograph at right.) 

 Certain  elements  of  the  distribution 
manifold  contained  low  points  which 
allowed  the  accumulation  of  water 
within  piping 
that  could  not  be 
drained.  Such  a  circumstance  could 
cause  corrosion  that  could  possibly 
negatively  effect  operation  of  other 
components.  (Photographs at right.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
• 

 
 

 

 
•  The CO2 system’s pilot and co-pilot bottles did not appear to operate correctly according to the 
firefighters involved and thus had to be manually activated using the valve handles located on 
top  of  the  cylinders.    Additionally,  during  the  event,  the  bank  bottles  were  similarly  activated 
due to the uncertainty of their release. At least one pilot bottle activation hose was reported to 
have leaked.  
 

•  The system had been recently serviced and inspected by an authorized service provider. 

 
Because  of  these  and  other  issues,  the  United  States  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that 
Vessel  Builders  /  Shipyards,  Classification  Societies,  Insurers, Owners  /  Operators,  System  Service 
Personnel, and others involved with these systems: 
 

•  Carefully  and  critically  review,  routinely  inspect  and  maintain,  verify  and  test  their  Fixed  Fire 

Fighting installations to ensure that they will operate correctly during an emergency. 

 
Developed by the U.S. Coast Guard Headquarter’s Office of Investigations and Analysis, Washington, 
DC.  Questions may be addressed to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil. 

2

