 
 
 
 
 
October 23, 2008                                                                                                                     Alert 8-08 
Washington, DC  
 

INSPECTION OF FUEL OIL QUICK-CLOSING VALVES 

 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and/or  operators,  vessel  engineers, 
marine inspection personnel and others involved with the technical examination of machinery space 
equipment  fully  understand  the  critical  nature  and  importance  of  fuel  oil  quick-closing  valves 
(FOQCVs)  and  associated  systems.    FOQCV  systems  must  be  well  maintained  and  tested  in  the 
same  way  they  would  be  used  in  an  emergency  (e.g.  close  all  valves  on  each  system  at  the  same 
time).  Crewmember  knowledge,  testing,  maintenance  and  repair,  system  operation  and  limitations, 
documentation, and spare parts are essential elements to review during an effective evaluation of an 
FOQCV system. 
 
During a fire onboard the USNS SHUGHART on March 5, 2004, more than half of the FOQCVs failed 
to  close  properly,  which  prevented  the  ship's  service  generators  from  being  secured.    The 
investigators  found  that  the  valves  had  not  been  well  maintained  and  the  testing  protocol  used 
onboard  the  ship  did  not  test  the  valves  properly.    During  testing,  valves  were  closed  using  a 
hydraulic hand pump system; the quantity of oil within the system should be sufficient to close all of 
them.  However,  there  is  no  way  to  determine  that  the  system  contains  enough  oil  to  close  all  the 
valves, if prior to completing the testing some of the valves are reset! 
 
International  and  domestic  regulations  require  that  positive  shutoff  valves  located  outside  the  fuel 
tank be arranged with a means to be closed remotely from outside the compartment.  These positive 
shutoff valves may be valves that are remotely closed gradually (e.g. turning a mechanical reach rod) 
or  power operated.   
 
FOQCVs  are  positive  shutoff  valves  and  they  may  be  the  final  means  of  securing  the  fuel  to  a 
flammable  liquid  fire.    It  is  absolutely  critical  that  the  ability  to  close  the  valves  be  maintained  at  all 
times.    The  periodic  maintenance  necessary  to  ensure  proper  operation  of  the  FOQCVs  must  be 
given the highest priority, and completed as required. Records of completed maintenance and testing 
should be kept on board the vessel. 
 
Because FOQCVs and other positive shutoff valves on fuel tanks have the potential to prevent loss of 
life and/or critical equipment during a fire, the importance of verifying their proper operation can not 
be  overstated.    As  a  result  of  the  USNS  SHUGHART  casualty,  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  Office  of 
Systems Engineering developed recommended inspection procedures for the testing and operation of 
FOQCVs which follow.  The U.S. Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners and/or operators, 
vessel engineers, marine inspection personnel and others ensure:  
 
a)  The  valve  operating  system  is  capable  of  remotely  closing  all  valves  in  the  event  of  a  fire.    It  is 
imperative  the  system  is  tested  as  designed.  It  may  be  designed  to  close  valves  sequentially  or 
simultaneously.    Also,  there  may  be  manual  input  such  as  a  hydraulic  hand  pump  operation 
required at the remote control station.  There is no defined time limit to close the valve; the time 
required will depend on the size of the valve and the system design.   

 
b)  There  should  be  technical  manuals  on  board  containing  diagrams  and  information  that 
describe the system components, recommended spare parts requirements, maintenance 
and operation. Schematics and drawings of the systems should also be available. 

c)   All machinery space workers should be able to identify the valves and how to close them locally 
and remotely in an emergency. They should be able to demonstrate substantial knowledge of the 
system,  its  importance  and  operation.    Ship  engineers  should  be  familiar  with  the  technical 
manual and the associated maintenance requirements for all of the system components.   

During  Coast  Guard  inspections,  engineers  should  be  able  to  explain  to  the  marine  inspector  the 
important  aspects  of  the  manual,  as  well  as  the  general  maintenance  requirements  of  the  system 
and  provide  information  as  to  when  it  was  last  performed.  Further,  they  should  be  able  to  explain 
how the valves are reset following closure.  A good test of a crew member's general knowledge of 
fire  fighting  would  be  to  ask  them  details  of  the  technical  items  noted  above  with  an  emphasis  on 
why these valves are important.  

The domestic regulations enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard for positive shutoff valves are contained 
in  46  CFR  Part  56.50-60(d),  Subparagraph  3.    These  regulations  are  available  through  the  U.S. 
Government  Printing  Office  (GPO)  and  may  be  downloaded  without  cost  from  the  GPO’s  internet 
website http://www.gpoaccess.gov/index.html.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Office of Domestic Vessel 
Activities (CG-5431), United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.   

******* 

 

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

