 
 
 
 
 
September  20,  2011                                                                                Alert  05-11 
Washington, DC                                   Parasailing Operations 
Know your ROPES 

 

A series of parasail incidents resulting in fatalities and injuries have occurred over the last few years.  
Several marine casualty investigations are ongoing and some are near completion.  Common causal 
factors are being identified in addition to causal factors that are unique to a specific event.  The Coast 
Guard  believes  that  communication  of  known  issues  is  essential  in  minimizing  potential  future 
casualties  and  strongly  reminds  parasail  operators  and  those  associated  with  the  business  of  the 
following: 
Remember that most parasail fatalities and injuries are related to the failure of the towline. Failures 
occur  significantly  below  the  rated  towline  strengths  due  to  a  variety  of  reasons  that  may  include 
cyclic  loading,  long  term  exposure  to  environmental  elements,  the  presence  of  knots,  and 
overloading. 
Observe  and  monitor  weather  conditions  continuously.    Most  frequently  increases  in  wind  speed 
impact the relative speed against the chute and cause the overloading. As the wind speed doubles 
the  load  on  the  towline  may  quadruple.    Monitor  your  VHF  radio  weather  channel  and  learn  to 
interpret the effect of wind speed on the water surface. Note the formation of squalls, thunderstorms, 
or when larger weather fronts are expected to pass through your operational area. Cease operations 
well before such weather features impact your operation. 
Prepare  for  emergencies  by  having  well  documented  procedures  applicable  to  a  variety  of 
circumstances,  normal  operations  and  emergencies  such  as  towline  breaks,  winch  failures, 
propulsion  failures,  and  other  concerns  that  can  impact  your  own  or  your  passenger’s  safety.  
Regularly  perform  drills  to  ensure  expert  proficiencies  in  accomplishing  all  emergency  or  routine 
procedures. 
Ensure that all of your equipment is properly maintained on a continuing basis.  This includes the 
winch, and drive motor, hydraulic brakes, hoses and piping, spooling systems, and other tackle. Also 
check your chute, harness, and related components for stitching failures, degradation, and the need 
for general repairs.  Immediately repair and correct identified problems. 
Safety  is  up  to  you  the  Operator.    The  Coast  Guard  does  not  regulate  or  inspect  parasail 
equipment or regulate parasail operations.  
 
 
The  Coast  Guard  recognizes  that  there  are  many  other  issues  associated  with  this  sport  and 
encourages owners and operators to work with each other and related industry associations to share 
best  practices  and  develop  safe  operational  standards  to  minimize  potential  injuries  and  deaths.  
Coast  Guard  Licensed  Operators  are  expected  to  provide  an  adequate  level  of  care  during  vessel 
operations.  Administrative  action  may  be  taken  against  the  operator  if  his  or  her  unsafe  actions  or 
decisions lead to a casualty. 
 
This  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  and  domestic  or 
international  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  USCG 
Headquarters, Washington, DC. 
Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  Http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:  Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

