  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 1998 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

IMPROVISING 

      Safety Alert 07-98 
 

One dictionary defines the word improvise to mean "unprepared"; "to make, provide, or do with the 
tools and materials at hand, usually to fill an unforeseen and immediate need."  

Many  old  sea  stories  have  been  written  on  how  seamen  had  improvised  in  emergency  situations, 
such as a ship coming into port with a "jury mast" or "jury rudder."  

When proper precautions are not followed, a lot of things can happen, oftentimes they are bad. For 
example, the deck force was chipping and painting booms and had rigged two pieces of 1" dunnage 
from  a  winch  to  the  top  of  deck  cargo,  a  span  of  about  6  feet.  They  used  this  improvised  walkway 
most of the morning until knocking off for lunch when one of the boards gave way and a seaman fell 
to the deck several feet. He was seriously injured.  

Occasionally, seamen are observed improvising on the job by using a screwdriver in place of a chisel, 
a wrench instead of a hammer, a box or drum to stand on in lieu of a well secured ladder. This kind of 
improvising is dangerous and unnecessary. When we start to work with insufficient or incorrect tools 
or  equipment,  we  are  only  asking  for  trouble.  Instead  of  leaving  the  job  to  get  the  proper  tools,  we 
attempt  to  pick  up  what  is  handy,  and  the  next  thing  we  have  is  an  accident.  Incorrect  and  unsafe 
tools are equally bad.  

When we recognize the dangers of improvising, then we must put this knowledge to work. Don't take 
chances, whether it be yourself or a shipmate, as soon as we see improvising on the job it is our duty 
to stop it at once.  

Any  form  of  improvising  has  no  place  on  a  ship  where  safety  and  good  seamanship  are  the 
watchword.  Planning  ahead  will  prevent  improvising,  and  remember  that  no  job  is  so  urgent  that  it 
can't be performed safely.  

Let's  leave  the  "jury  rig"  for  emergencies  where  a  seaman's  know-how  to  improvise  may  be 
necessary.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

 

 

1 

