 
 
 
 
 
September 5, 2008                                                                                                               Alert  4-08 
Washington, DC   
 

UNLICENSED TO DRIVE 

 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  reminds  the  towing  industry  of  its  responsibility  to  properly  man 
their vessels with adequate numbers of qualified and licensed crewmembers.   
 
Recently, a collision on the Mississippi river near downtown New Orleans between a Cargo Ship and 
a loaded oil barge being pushed by an Uninspected Towing Vessel (UTV) resulted in a major oil spill, 
significant  environmental  damage,  a  costly  oil  spill  cleanup  response,  closed  “The  River”  for  six 
straight days, and caused significant economic loss to the local Louisiana economy.   
 
The  Commander,  Eighth  Coast  Guard  District,  convened  a  formal  investigation  into  the  incident.  
While  the  investigation  continues,  the  preliminary  findings  of  this  inquiry  have  revealed  that  the  tug 
was operated solely by an individual who held a Coast Guard Apprentice Mate (Steersman) license 
and who was not authorized to independently direct its movement.  An apprentice is strictly prohibited 
from operating a towing vessel unless in the presence of a properly licensed Master or Mate (Pilot).  
Coincidentally, just a few days prior to this incident another UTV was involved in a marine casualty 
that resulted in the sinking of the tug.  The preliminary investigation into that incident revealed that the 
crewmember  operating  that  vessel  at  the  time  of  the  casualty  only  held  a  Coast  Guard  Apprentice 
Mate license and similarly was not authorized to independently operate the tug. 
 
Failure  to  properly  man  a  vessel  may  result  in  significant  penalties  and  fines,  not  to  mention  other, 
possibly more significant and costly civil litigation.  Possible enforcement actions include issuing civil 
penalties,  taking  mariners  who  hold  a  Coast  Guard  issued  credential  (e.g.  a  license  or  merchant 
mariner's  document)  to  a  suspension  and  revocation  hearing  in  order  to  suspend  or  revoke  that 
credential, and/or refer a violation to the United States Attorney for criminal prosecution.  The Coast 
Guard  may  also  shut  down  the  operation  of  vessel  or  facility,  or  prohibit  a  vessel  from  entering  a 
particular port or place until such time a specific violation is corrected.   
 
While the costs associated with the fines and penalties can be very severe, had this incident involved 
a  collision  with  a  small  passenger  vessel  or  ferry  commonly  known  to  transit  in  and  around  New 
Orleans this casualty may have had a much more severe outcome: a significant loss of life!   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations  and  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC,  and  the 
Prevention Division, Coast Guard Atlantic Area.  
 

Office of Investigations and Analysis – http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe – Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

******* 

 

Page 1 of 1 

