June 18, 2018 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Safety Alert 11 -18 

 

A PFD that’s Unwearable 

Makes an Emergency Situation Unbearable! 

 

Photograph 1 

Strap Slides Through Slot 

This  safety  alert  raises  awareness  of  a  potentially 
dangerous  circumstance 
involving  Personal  Flotation 
Devices  (PFDs).  During  several  inspections  involving 
different  vessels,  Coast  Guard  personnel  discovered  a 
significant number (>100) of unwearable type 1 PFDs that 
would have presented a problem for users if needed in an 
emergency.  Owners  and  operators  are  reminded  that 
regulations require PFDs onboard vessels to be wearable 
and in serviceable condition. 
 
 
Normally, when a wearer dons the type of PFD shown, a 
person grabs both sides of the vest to pull the sides apart 
and  the  waist  band  strap  moves  freely  through  a  slit 
opening (see photographs 1 and 2).  The user is then able 
to easily don the PFD by placing it over the head, passing 
the  strap  around  the  body,  clipping  the  end  onto  the 
securing D-ring, and tightening the strap securely. 
 
 
During recent PFD inspections, inspectors discovered that 
the securing strap was secured at its bitter end, and was 
also fused to the side of the PFD by what appeared to be 
the  shell  coating  or  color-matching  material 
(see 
photographs  3  and  4).  As  a  result,  a  user  is  unable  to 
separate the halves of the PFD to open the gap and place 
over the head to wear.   
 
 
Based on the number of problematic PFDs discovered, the 
Coast Guard is strongly recommending that owners and 
operators using this type of PFD inspect each one for this 
condition.  If problematic PFDs are discovered, owners and 
operators  are  encouraged  to  report  their  findings  to  the 
Coast Guard Office of Design and Engineering Standards 
via email to:   TypeApproval@uscg.mil. Please include the 
name  of  manufacturer,  design  number,  lot  numbers,  and 
quantity of PFDs impacted. Also indicate if the coating had 
been  touched  up  at  any  time,  and  the  total  number  of 
similar unaffected PFDs onboard.   
 
 
 

Showing Strap Movement 

Photograph 2 

Photograph 3 

Fused Location 

PFD Will Not Spread Open 

 
 
 
 

 
 
Note: The Coast Guard is deliberately not indicating the manufacturer’s name until additional details 
and the scope of the potential problem are fully known.  
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.  Developed  by  USCG  Sector  New  York 
Inspections Department and distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis. Questions may 
be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

Safety Alert XX-18 

Photograph 4 

Close-up of Fused Area 

