         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

August 09, 2016 
Washington, DC 

 

 Safety Alert 09-16 

Know Your Day-to-Day Dangers! 

Proper Precautions Can Save Your Life 

 
This safety alert reiterates the importance of following proper safety procedures and using the 
right  protective  equipment  such  as  personal  multi-gas  detectors.    Recently,  a  Coast  Guard 
team  boarded  a  commercial  shrimp  vessel  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  was  exposed  to  an 
extremely  hazardous  atmosphere  containing  hydrogen  sulfide  gas  (H2S).    The  team’s 
monitoring equipment functioned properly alerting them of an unsafe atmosphere of H2S in the 
fish hold.  An elevated level of H2S was also detected in the engine room. Both spaces were 
evacuated. 
 
The vessel’s voyage was terminated and the vessel was escorted to the dock.  The crew was 
instructed not to enter the spaces until a marine chemist determined the spaces were safe to 
enter.    The  spaces  were  ventilated  overnight  and  a  chemist  checked  them  the  following 
morning.    The  source  of  the  H2S  was  attributed  to  decomposing  shrimp.  The  chemist  also 
identified  another  concern  related  to  the  improper  use  of  sodium  metabisulfite  (NA2S2O5),  a 
common preservative used onboard shrimp boats that use ice as their refrigeration.  
 
In April 1999, a 62-foot fishing vessel was reported a week 
overdue  and  a  search  ensued.    After  locating  the  vessel 
21  nautical  miles  southwest  of  Cape  San  Blas,  FL,  a 
Coast Guard Utility Boat was dispatched to investigate the 
situation.    A  boarding  team  accessed  the  vessel  and 
discovered  three  crewmembers  lying  in  the  cargo  hold. 
The  fishing  nets  were  subsequently  cut  loose  and  the 
vessel  was  towed  to  Panama  City.    Various  agencies, 
Coast  Guard  personnel  and  a  coroner  met  the  vessel  at 
the  dock.    At  the  dock,  the  cargo  hold  was  eventually 
certified  gas  free  and  the  deceased  crewmembers  were 
removed.  
 
The  suspected  cause  of  death  for  the  1999  incident  was 
the  improper  use  of  sodium  metabisulfite.    This  food 
preservative 
for  many  products 
including fruits, vegetables, and  shrimp.  On vessels,  it is 
mixed  in  measured  proportions  with  water  and  then  bags 
of  shrimp  are  dipped  into  it  before  being  placed  on  ice. 
This  process  is  normally  performed  on  deck  where 
ventilation  is  adequate.    In  this  instance,  the  powdery 

is  commonly  used 

1 

Safety Alert 09 -16 

 

chemical was taken into the fish hold by bucket and spread on the bags of shrimp which were 
then  covered  with  ice.  It  is  believed  that  the  crew  thought  the  melting  ice  would  mix  with  the 
powder and dissolve on to the shrimp.  Attempting to mix sodium metabisulfite in a confined or 
space is very dangerous as the practice can produce Sulfur Dioxide (SO2), which is toxic and 
has a pungent irritating odor.  
 
Sodium  metabisulfite  manufacturers  package  the  chemical  in  plastic  bags  and  provide 
instructions  for  use,  safe  handling,  and  personnel  protective  equipment  (PPE)  needed  in 
English  and  Spanish.    No  PPE  was  noted  onboard  the  vessel,  and  in  this  instance  the 
Vietnamese crew did not read English or Spanish.  
 
As  a  result  of  these  discoveries  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  Owners  and 
Operators of all vessels: 

•  Maintain awareness of what hazardous materials are used onboard; 

•  Provide training in their use; and  

•  Supply PPE for those who work with the chemicals.  

 

 

 

for 

safety, 

is  provided 

Coast Guard personnel must remember that fish holds are confined spaces and should 
not  be  accessed  without  the  proper  safety  equipment.    It  must  also  be  noted  that  the 
common multi-gas meter in use by Marine Inspectors does not detect Sulfur Dioxide. 
 
This  safety  alert 
informational 
purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international 
or  material 
requirements.  Developed  by 
the  Eighth  District 
Coast Guard Prevention Office, Commercial Fishing 
Vessel  Safety  Program.    Distributed  by  the  Coast 
Guard  Headquarters  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Analysis.    Any  questions  or  comments  should  be 
sent to: HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
 
 

operational 

 

2 

