 
 
 
 
November 16, 2009                                                                                                                Alert 07-09 
Washington, DC                                   SAILBOAT RIGGING DANGERS 
 
Recently  in  the  Florida  Keys,  the  standing  rigging  of  a  60’  inspected  passenger  carrying  sailing  catamaran 
failed, causing its rotating wing spar mast to collapse. Evidence suggests that the port shroud parted where it 
exits  a  swageless  mechanical  end  fitting  located  on  the  upper  mast  at  a  common  shrouds/stay  connection. 
Although there were a number of passengers onboard at the time there were no resultant injuries. A six year 
review of Coast Guard casualty data shows 28 similar type casualties involving inspected sailing vessels. Of 
those 28, nine involved the failure of mast, spars and rigging components leading to dismastings; six of those 
involved sailing catamarans.  Two separate catamaran dismasting resulted in two fatalities. 
 
Common  among  the  dismasting  casualties  was  the 
failure  of  the  mast’s  standing  rigging.  While  this 
investigation  is  ongoing,  initial  forensic  metallurgical 
analysis  of  the  failed  cable  strands  showed  visual 
corrosion and evidence of fatigue failure. The shroud 
cable  and  swageless  end  fitting  had  been  installed 
seven years prior. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  reminds  all  commercial 
vessel  owners/operators,  especially 
those  of 
passenger  carrying  sailing  catamaran’s  of  similar 
build, of their responsibility to maintain their vessels, 
associated equipment, systems and components in a 
satisfactory  condition  suitable  for  their  employed 
service at all times. Owner and operators should not 
wait  until  regularly  scheduled  Coast  Guard  inspections  to  identify  problems  but  should  be  ever  vigilant  and 
implement  routine  inspection,  maintenance,  and  repair  procedures  in  accordance  with  good  marine  practice 
and in alignment with applicable requirements. Owners and operators should consult the vessel manufacturer 
or other naval architecture, marine engineering services or qualified rigger regarding any concerns they might 
have regarding the regular flexing and working of their vessel’s standing rigging  
 
Inspection requirements for small passenger vessels are found in 46 CFR 175-185. Additionally, Coast Guard 
Sector Honolulu, by consensus with their local sail vessel industry, developed Inspection Note #13 that outlines 
an  enhanced  inspection  regime  for  sailboat  rigging,  masts  and  associated  components  for  their  inspected 
small passenger sailing vessel fleet consisting almost entirely of catamarans. This information is useful to both 
marine inspection personnel and vessel owners/operators and is available by searching the web using the key 
words: “Sector Honolulu Inspection Note #13”. Manufacturer published guidelines on mast and rigging system 
maintenance  can  be  found  in  “Rigging  Service  Guidelines”  http://www.navtec.net/docs/RiggingService.pdf 
published  by  Navtec  Rigging  Solutions.  Practical  standing  rigging  inspection  information  from  a  marine 
surveyor’s perspective is available at http://www.dixielandmarine.com/yachts/DLrigprob.html. 
 
This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and operational or material requirement. This does 
not  represent  an  official  endorsement  of  Navtech  Rigging  Solutions,  Dixieland  Marine  Inc,  its  services, 
products,  or  employees.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard 
Headquarters, Washington, DC. Questions can be addressed to Mr. Ken Olsen at the email address below. 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

