May 11, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 5-15 
 

 

SECURED FOR SEA OR NOT 

Anchor Equipment – Attention to details. 

investigated  and  discovered 

 
This  safety  alert  serves  to  remind  vessel  operators  and  company  technical  managers  of  the 
importance  of  proper  ship’s  anchor  use,  stowage,  and  maintenance.    Anchor  windlass  brakes, 
riding  pawls,  and  devil’s  claws  must  be  used  as  designed  and  periodically  maintained  to  ensure 
effectiveness  and  safety.    It’s  critical  that  proper  supervision  and  inspection  be  conducted  during 
and after anchoring, retrieving and storage evolutions, and maintenance activities.  When installing 
a  replacement  anchor,  it  must  meet  the  vessel’s  technical  specifications  and  fit  correctly  when 
housed.     
 
Recently,  a  freight  ship  was  underway  in  15  foot 
seas  when  the  forepeak  flood  alarms  activated.  
The  crew 
the 
starboard anchor had slipped 10-15 links, causing 
it  to  strike  and  puncture  the  hull.    As  a  result, 
seawater flooded the bow thruster and emergency 
fire  pump  compartment.    The  casualty  resulted  in 
excess  of  $1  million  in  vessel  damage  and  a 
month’s lost revenues while the vessel was out of 
service affecting repairs. 
 
During the repair period, it was discovered that the 
anchor  windlass  brake  pad  had  worn  down  to  2-
3mm thickness.  With only this amount of pad the 
fully  applied  brake  could  not  achieve  its  designed 
holding power.  The crew should have recognized 
the excessive wear to the brake pads and required 
replacement. 
 
It  was  also  discovered  that  the  involved  anchor 
had dissimilar specifications to the original anchor 
it  had  replaced.    As  a  result,  the  replacement 
anchor’s  relative  position  in  the  hawse  pipe  was 
not the same because of its different shank length 
and  connecting  linkages.    The  size  difference 
prevented  the  riding  pawl  from  properly  engaging 
the anchor chain.    
 
 
 

1 

Safety Alert 5 -15 

 

As an added safety device, a wire sling had been used to 
secure the anchor.  The wire sling was threaded through 
a  chain  link  and  secured  to  the  vessel  with  a  pelican 
hook.    When  the  sling  broke  and  the  brake  failed,  the 
anchor’s  weight  and  ship’s  movement  then  caused  it  to 
drop before the riding pawl could properly engaged.  
 
The sling failure was likely caused by the corrosion of the 
inner wire strands.  The inner wire strands were exposed 
to  the  elements  because  of  the  sharp  bend  in  the  wire 
created  by  being  fed  through  the  chain  link  and  secured 
by  a  pelican  hook.    The  wire  sling  was  inspected 
regularly;  however,  those  performing  the  inspections 
were not instructed on how to examine and determine its 
serviceability. 
 
The  ISM  Code’s  and  Safety  Management  System’s 
purpose are to detect, correct, and prevent circumstances 
as described in this alert.  Companies must identify equipment  and technical systems, subject to 
sudden failure, which may result in a hazardous condition, and provide specific measures aimed at 
increasing  equipment  reliability  and  ensuring  integration  into  the  ship’s  operational  maintenance 
routine. 

As  a  result  of  this  casualty,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  vessel  owners, 
operators, and company technical personnel ensure: 
 

•  All  preventative  maintenance  programs  are  up  to  date  and  include  specific  language  on 
anchor  windlass  equipment,  particularly  emphasizing  when  brake  assemblies  must  be 
renewed or adjusted; 

•  When key vessel components, such as anchors, are to be replaced, that a proper company 

plan review occurs, taking into account all possible variables; and  

•  Persons involved with vessel maintenance and repair have technical resources available to 

assist in determining serviceability or replacement of shipboard equipment.  

 
Lastly, the Coast Guard strongly reminds all maritime operators of the importance of performing 
regular  maintenance  and  inspections  on  anchor  handling  components  to  keep  them  ready  for 
immediate release in accordance with 33 Code of Federal Regulations 164.11(o). 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.    Developed  by  Sector  Los  Angeles  - 
Long  Beach  - 
  For  questions  or  concerns  e-mail  LT  Patrick  Brown  – 
Patrick.J.Brown@uscg.mil . 
  

Investigations. 

2 

 

 

 

