 
 
 
 
 
December 31, 2012                                                                                                               Alert 05-12 
Washington, DC 

                           Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Pressure Switch Location for Fixed Fire Suppression Systems 

Where’s yours located? 

 

This safety alert addresses the location of fire suppression system pressure switches aboard vessels. 
These critical components sense the activation of the system and then electrically secures the venti-
lation systems operating in the protected space.  Securing the ventilation is essential in extinguishing 
a fire onboard a vessel. It assists in isolating the fire within the space, minimizes the introduction of 
additional oxygen to fuel the fire and prevents the loss of fire suppression agents from the space.  
 
Recently, a vessel with an installed fixed CO2 fire suppression system, suf-
fered extensive damage due to a fire that started in the engine room. During 
the  firefighting  efforts  the  crew  reported  that  the  engine  room  ventilation 
could  not  be  secured.    A  post  casualty  damage  survey  of  the  vessel  re-
vealed that the pressure switch used to secure the ventilation was located 
within  the  engine  room.  See  the  photograph  of  the  damaged  pressure 
switch at the right and new switch below. 
 
Fixed  CO2  systems  on  inspected/regulated  vessels  need  to  be  type  ap-
proved  and  installed  in  accordance  with  applicable  regulations;  46  CFR 
25.30-15, 46 CFR Subpart 76.15, 46 CFR Subpart 95.15, 46 CFR 118.410, 
etc.    These  regulations  require  all  controls  and  valves  for  the  operation  of 
the  system  to  be  outside  the  space  protected,  and  notes  they  cannot  be 
located in any space that might be cut off or made inaccessible in the event 
of fire in the protected spaces.  The Coast Guard considers pressure switches that are used in such 
systems a “control.” 

 
For Uninspected Towing Vessels, 46 CFR 25.30-15 (b) requires installation 
in  accordance  with  46  CFR  Subpart  76.15  and  reiterates  the  location  re-
quirements. 
 
The Coast Guard strongly reminds Owners and Operators of vessels with 
installed  fixed  fire  suppression  systems  to  ensure  that  these  switches  are 
properly  located  aboard  their  vessels.    If  the  pressure  switch  or  switches 
are located within the space being protected, they should be relocated by a 
properly trained fire suppression service technician.  Doing so will assist in 
ensuring system functionality and accessibility in the event of an emergen-
cy.    Failing  to  do  so  could  have  serious  consequences  to  the  vessel,  its 
crew and the environment. 
 
 

This safety alert is for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Commercial  Vessel  Com-
pliance, Washington, DC.  Questions may be addressed to CG-CVC-1@uscg.mil.   
                                                                        ******* 

