  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 9, 2003 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

CARBON MONOXIDE EXPOSURE 

      Safety Alert 05-03 
 

The following information is provided by the U.S. Coast Guard's Marine Safety Office (MSO) in 
Mobile, Alabama.The MSO is currently investigating two deaths aboard a fishing vessel in Bayou 
la Batre, Alabama. Preliminary findings indicate that the victims were exposed to deadly levels of 
carbon monoxide (CO). Although the investigation is not complete, important lessons have been 
learned. 

The carbon monoxide came from the exhaust of a portable generator located in the forward part of 
the engine room. This generator provided power to the vessel's the air conditioning unit and main 
deck lighting. The generator's exhaust gases vented directly into the engine room. Initial inspection 
of the vessel revealed:  

improper ventilation in the engine room,  

• 
•  exhaust leaks from the main engine exhaust manifold,  
•  structural corrosion of the main deck, and  
•  open wiring trunks between the engine room and the cabin / wheelhouse.  

Inadequate ventilation in the engine room in conjunction with the openings between decks allowed 
the exhaust from the portable generator to easily enter the cabin area. The victims had ceased 
fishing, secured the main engine, and retired for the evening. Due to the extreme heat and 
humidity, the doors to the cabin / wheelhouse were closed and the generator was started to power 
the portable air conditioning unit. The exhaust from the portable generator quickly filled the engine 
room with deadly levels of carbon monoxide which in turn seeped through deck openings into the 
cabin area. Unaware of the dangers, the victims went to sleep. 

Carbon monoxide is a colorless and odorless gas produced as a by-product of combustion in 
diesel and gasoline engines. This toxic gas can accumulate quickly, especially in confined spaces, 
and has deadly effects on those exposed to it. Proper elimination of exhaust gases is vital in 
maintaining a safe atmosphere onboard any vessel.The Coast Guard urges mariners to ensure 
that the exhaust systems of all diesel and gasoline engines are properly vented away from 
accommodation, working, and recreational areas onboard vessels.  

BE VIGILANT TO THIS ISSUE....YOUR LIFE DEPENDS ON IT. 

Questions  regarding  the  content  of  this  safety  alert  may  be  addressed  to  Lt.  James  Eiland  at 
jeiland@miomobile.uscg.mil or 251.441.5763. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

