 

         

September 30, 2010 
Washington, DC 
 

 

 

 

Alert 8-10 

SHIP SECURITY ALERT SYSTEM (SSAS) 

Is your system ready? 

 
The U.S. Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners, operators and/or others involved with the 
technical examination and testing of a Ship Security Alert System (SSAS) fully understand the critical 
nature and importance of this system.  A SSAS must be serviced and maintained in order to be fully 
operational in the event of an emergency.   
 
Safety  of  Life  at  Sea  (SOLAS),  Chapter  XI-2/6  mandates  the  carriage  of  shipboard  equipment  for 
sending  covert  alerts  indicating  the  security  of  the  ship  in  under  threat  or  has  been  compromised 
(such  as  piracy,  terrorism  or  armed  robbery).      SOLAS  requires  that  the  SSAS  is  capable  of  being 
activated from the navigation bridge and in at least one other location.  The SSAS should conform to 
performance standards equivalent to those adopted by the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  
 
An  investigation  into  a  recent  Breach  of  Security  (BOS)  onboard  a  vessel  operating  overseas 
revealed  that  the  system  did  not  function  properly.    It  was  discovered  that  the  primary  activation 
button failed to send the BOS message and that when the secondary location activation button was 
depressed, not all critical data was transmitted. Under other circumstances, this type of failure could 
have been disastrous and resulted in significant harm to the crew. 
 
Although the SSAS was serviced two days prior to the incident as a part of the annual Safety Radio 
Survey, records indicate that the technician did not have the proper testing equipment  for the system 
on board and only an internal operational self-test was carried out and accepted.  A complete SSAS 
survey  with  an  external  test  would  have  indentified  the  system  faults  which  then  could  have  been 
corrected prior to the incident. 
 
The  SSAS  survey  should  always  be  performed  by  a  fully  qualified  technician  who  has  adequate 
knowledge  of  the  International  Ship  &  Port  Facility  Security  (ISPS)  Code  pertaining  to  SSAS,  the 
SOLAS Convention and the IMO standards for SSAS.  A technician’s survey should involve checks 
for: 
 
a)  compliance with IMO performance standards, 
b)  a minimum of two activation points are provided, 
c)  transmission of the security alert is possible without an adjustment of the radio system, 
d)  transmission initiated by the SSAS activation points include a unique/identifier, 
e)  transmission includes the ship identity and current position associated with a date and time,  
f)  when activated, SSAS continues the alert until deactivated and/or reset, 
g)  SSAS is capable of being tested, and 
h)  SSAS  power  source  is  powered  from  the  ship’s  main  source  of  power  and  is  also  capable  of 

 

operation from an alternate source of power. 

 
 

1

 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and  operators  ensure  that  the  SSAS 
survey  completed  on  board  involves  the  checks  listed  above  and  that  if  deficiencies  are  identified, 
they be corrected immediately. 
  
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  mandates  of 
domestic or international safety, operational or material regulations or standards.  Developed by the 
Office  of  Vessel  Activities  (CG-543),  Distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis  (CG-
545),  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC.    Questions  may  be  addressed  to 
LCDR James Fogle at James.T.Fogle@uscg.mil. 

                                                                      *******  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 

To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 
 

2

