 
 
 
 
 

 

 

October 4, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 14-16 

Don’t Lose Your Tow in Heavy Weather 
Plan ahead to ensure a safe endeavor! 

 

In 

late  2012, 

 
This  safety  alert  reminds  owners  and 
operators  of  businesses  and  vessels 
associated  with  the  towing  of  large  drilling 
rigs, such as semi-submersibles, conical or 
other  types  of  non-standard  tows,  of  the 
importance  of  planning  for  such  significant 
towing  operations. 
the 
KULLUK,  a  conical  drilling  unit,  was  under 
tow  from  Dutch  Harbor,  Alaska  to  Seattle, 
Washington  in  heavy  weather,  when  a 
series  of  circumstances  resulted  in  the 
failure of critical towing gear.  The primary 
towing  vessel,  the  AIVIQ,  also  suffered  a 
loss of propulsion due to contaminated fuel 
shortly  after  the  initial  towing  gear  failure.  
As  a  result,  the  KULLUK  drifted  for  four 
days  despite  many  unsuccessful  efforts  to 
regain control of the rig.  Ultimately the rig 
grounded  off  Sitkalidak 
Island,  AK  on 
December 31, 2012.  An investigation was 
conducted  by  the  Coast  Guard  and  the 
associated Report of Investigation is available here.  The National Transportation Safety Board also 
published a Marine Accident Brief on the incident.  
 
In early August of this year, a 17,000-ton semi-submersible drilling rig, the TRANSOCEAN WINTER, 
went hard aground on the west side of the Isle of Lewis, Scotland.  While en route from Norway to 
Malta, its towing line from the vessel ALP FORWARD parted after encountering severe weather.  This 
incident is currently under investigation by the United Kingdom’s Maritime Accident Investigation and 
it could have similar causal factors to the Alaskan incident.   

One recommendation stemming from the United States Coast Guard’s Report of Investigation on the 
KULLUK incident requested that the federally-chartered Towing Safety Advisory Committee (TSAC) 
establish  a  work  group  to  address  the  issues  related  to  the  KULLUK  casualty  and  the  towage  of 
mobile  offshore  drilling  units  (MODUs)  in  high  latitude  environments.    TSAC  approved  the  group’s 
final  report  at  its  spring  2016  meeting  and  delivered  it  to the  Coast  Guard on  May  17,  2016.    Their 
final  report  provides  valuable  information  for  all  organizations  and  professionals  associated  with 
towing large structures at sea such as MODUs.   

 

 

1 of 2 

Safety Alert 14-16 

 

The final report included background and guidance on the following topics:  

•  Critical  Tows:  Describes  how  to  use  a  simplified  risk  assessment  methodology  to  analyze 
aspects of a future tow operation thus establishing future safety and equipment requirements;  
•  Voyage  Planning  /  Plans  (as  required  by  the  Code  of  Federal  Regulations):  Provides  a  solid 
but  expandable  foundation  ensuring  consideration  of  variables  capable  of  impacting  an 
intended operation;  

•  Tow  Procedures:  Addresses  operational  requirements;  defines  responsibilities  of  involved 
parties;  and  describes  equipment  parameters,  tow  motion  limitations,  and  the  importance  of 
having key reference material available;  

•  Towing Gear: Provides information from a technical and analytical perspective on all aspects 

of the entire range of tow gear, its identification, selection, testing, etc.;  

•  Tug  and  Tow  Master:  Provides 

interactions,  relationships,  and 
responsibilities  for  all  of  the  senior  persons  involved  in  the  towing  operation,  including  the 
Offshore Installation Manager (OIM);  

information  on 

the 

•  Marine  Warranty  Surveyor:  Explores  all  of  the  important  roles  and  evaluations  this  individual 

performs in an effort to minimize and eliminate potential risks for the tow; and  

•  Recommendations:  Presents  numerous  proposals  to  various  entities  associated  with  towing 

processes.   

These  recommendations,  together  with  the  content  from  other  sections  of  the  report,  collectively 
serve as an overview of Best Practices for High Risk Towing Operations.  

The Coast Guard strongly recommends the widest distribution of this information for consideration 
and inclusion into various Procedural and Safety Management Systems of towing industry associated 
companies. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.  Developed  and  distributed  the  Office  of 
Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.    Questions  or  comments  may  be  sent  to  HQS-PF-fldr-CG-
INV@uscg.mil. 

 

******* 

2 

 

 

