  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 1, 2002  (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

FUEL AND EXHAUST SYSTEM MAINTENANCE 

      Safety Alert 07-02 
 

Recently  a  35,000  DWT  product  tanker  suffered  a  major  engine  room  fire  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 
The fire occurred in the early morning hours while the vessel's engineroom and machinery spaces 
were  unattended.  Upon  onset  of  the  fire,  the  vessel's  smoke  detection  system  activated  the 
vessel's  fire  alarm.  Moments  afterwards  other  engineering  alarms  sounded  throughout  vessel. 
During this period crewmembers reported extensive smoke throughout the cabin passageways on 
different decks and in the bridge area. The vessel's  crew escaped each deck by exiting doors at 
the rear of the house or via the bridge. Engineering personnel prior to exiting their living quarters 
managed  to  activate  remote  stops  at  a  passageway  control  station.  Their  efforts  resulted  in  the 
shutdown of various fuel and ventilation systems within the engineroom.  

Initial reports indicate that due to the excessive smoke within the house and the inability to get to 
the firefighting locker, a decision was made to extinguish the fire using the vessel's fixed Carbon 
Dioxide  extinguishing  system.  Prior  to  release,  crewmembers  fitted  canvas  coverings  over 
engineroom  intake  and  exhaust  vents  while  others  performed  emergency  functions  such  as 
communications and preparations for launching the vessel's two lifeboats. Eventually, the vessel's 
Carbon Dioxide system was activated and successfully extinguished the fire. During the course of 
these events, a salvage team and tug were requested by the vessel's master.  

Several  other  vessels  including  one  from  the  same  operating  company  stood  by  to  provide 
assistance.  The  following  day  the  salvage  team  and  tug  arrived  on  scene.  Using  the  tug  they 
transferred  non-essential  personnel  to  the  standby  vessel  and  made  preparations  to  tow  the 
disabled tankship to port. There were no injuries or fatalities resulting from this casualty. However, 
main  engine  and  machinery  space  equipment  repair  costs,  associated  salvage  and  towing  costs 
associated are expected to be significant.  

The investigation to this casualty is not complete. This safety information serves as a reminder and 
is  provided  only  to  assist  vessel  owners,  operators,  shore-support  staff,  crews  and  engineering 
personnel  in  assessing  and  understanding  risks  associated  with  the  operation,  maintenance  and 
repair of their vessels.  

The vessel is equipped with two vee-type, 14 cylinder, reversing, 7000 hp, turbocharged, medium 
speed, four stroke diesel engines capable of using multiple fuels.  

Main Engines 

 

 

1 

Fuel 

Each  cylinder  has  its  own  cam  driven  fuel 
pump and injector. Each fuel pump is fitted 
with  its  own  supply  and  return  piping.  The 
pre-shaped  pipes  are  about  5/8ths  of  an 
inch  in  diameter  and  1  1/2  feet  long. 
Intermediate fuel oil when used is supplied 
under  pressure  at  about  35  psig  at  a 
temperature near 215 degrees Fahrenheit. 
The  supply  and  return  piping  attach  to 
manifolds  on  each  bank  of  cylinders  using 
a compression fitting. 

On the fuel pump ends, each pipe consists 
of  a  rectangular  shaped  block  containing 
two bolt holes. Both blocks connect directly 
opposite  one  another  on  the  fuel  pump 
housing.  Two  metric  bolts  are  used  with 
spacers  for  each  fitting.  The  heads  of  the 
bolts are drilled to receive safety wiring which when properly used prevents loosening. Also located 
on each block fitting directly between the two bolt holes is a viewing plug that is removed whenever 
necessary to time the fuel pump to the engine.  

Investigators  discovered  that  the  supply  line  to  the  starboard  engine  number  three  cylinder  fuel 
pump  had  fractured  just  below  its  connection  into  the  rectangular  block  fitting.  Additionally, 
shipyard  personnel  discovered  the  inboard  bolt  on  the  supply  line  fitting  loose.  Of  112  bolts 
securing  the  fuel  pump  fittings  on  the  vessel's  two  engines,  none  were  safety  wired  despite  the 
availability of drilled bolt heads and indications of such wiring in engine schematics and diagrams.  

Just under the block fitting of each connection, hose clamped around the tube joint is a rubber boot 
about four inches long. This boot is designed to deflect oil sprays downward should a break occur 
in this area. The boot on number three cylinder was destroyed in the fire. 

Heat Sources 

The exhaust piping begins at each cylinder head with a short section that contains a receptacle for 
an exhaust gas temperature pyrometer. Generally the piping consists of a series of ninety-degree 
fittings  (ells),  straight  runs,  flanges,  gaskets,  and  expansion  bellows  as  it  continues  the  length  of 
the  engine  to  other  ells  just  prior  to  entering  the  turbochargers.  At  sea  speed  loads,  vessel 
engineers reported main engine cylinder exhaust temperatures near 850 degrees Fahrenheit.  

Along the top center of the engines within the "vee" formed by the cylinder heads, all the exhaust 
pipes should be encased in an insulated casing or shrouding. Investigators discovered numerous 
disconnects  of  the  casing,  fallen  sections  and  a  general  absence  of  insulation  throughout  the 
system. None of the short sections that connect to each cylinder head, nor any of the ells near the 
turbocharger  end  of  the  engine  were  covered  with  insulation.  According  to  engine  manufacturer 
schematics, every connection at the cylinder heads should have been both wrapped with insulation 
and covered with shields. None of the 28 connections on both engines were covered.  

 

2 

Investigators  discovered  numerous  areas  where  intermediate  fuel  oil  had  contacted  these  hot 
surfaces. 

The United States Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners, operators, superintendents, 
port  engineers,  shipboard  engineers  and  crewmembers  of  vessels  having  similar  equipment 
ensure  the  proper  maintenance  and  repair  of  fuel  and  exhaust  systems  associated  with  main 
propulsion and diesel driven auxiliaries onboard their vessels. 

To reduce the risk of fatalities, injuries, environmental damage and  severe economic loss, diesel 
engines  of  all  types  and  their  associated  systems  should  be  maintained  as  designed  unless 
appropriate personnel have authorized modifications.  

The insulation of potential fuel oil ignition sources and the use of specialized fasteners and other 
devices  to  reduce  the  loosening  of  critical  engine  and  systems  components  is  essential  for  long 
term safe operations. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

