 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 3, 2017 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 08-17 

Know your high seas comms equipment and how to use them. 

You just might save your own life when in trouble offshore! 

 

 

the 

that 

to  note 

  Each  of 

Recent inquiries by Coast Guard Marine Inspectors indicate that a large number of vessel operators 
and  ship  masters  continue  to  rely  on  outdated  high  seas  communications  frequencies  when 
communicating  with  the  United  States  Coast  Guard.    This  Safety  Alert  reminds  all  mariners  of  the 
appropriate  use  of  Single  Side  Band  High 
Frequency  (SSB-HF)  radios  when  attempting 
to contact the Coast Guard outside the normal 
range  of  Very  High  Frequency-Frequency 
Modulation  (VHF-FM)  marine  radios.    It  is 
the  Coast  Guard 
important 
discontinued  monitoring 
SSB-HF 
frequency  of  2182  KHz  over  four  years  ago; 
nevertheless,  many  mariners  continue 
to 
attempt to contact the Coast Guard using this 
frequency.    Also,  many  mariners  attempt  to 
contact  the  Coast  Guard  using  their  EPIRBs, 
cell  phones,  SAT  phones,  and  even  NOAA 
weather  electronics. 
these 
its  own 
communications  devices  has 
limitations and specific functional capabilities.         Above: Example of Single Side Band High Frequency Radio                                    
 
SSB-HF  communications  offer  a  greater  transmission  range  when  other  options  are  not  available. 
SSB-HF  radios  equipped  with  digital  selective  calling  (DSC)  are  capable  of  triggering  an  alert  at 
Coast  Guard  Communications  Command  and  are  an  especially  reliable  means  for  initiating 
communications with the Coast Guard during distress situations. 
 
The Coast Guard keeps watch on the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS) SSB-HF 
frequencies 4125, 6215, 8291 and 12,290 kHz in place of the old international radiotelephone distress 
frequency 2182 kHz.  More detailed information on the SSB-HF and HF DSC frequencies on which 
the  Coast  Guard  keeps  watch 
listed  here: 
https://www.navcen.uscg.gov/?pageName=cgcommsCall.  Questions or comments concerning Coast 
Guard HF distress, safety and broadcast services may be sent to the Coast Guard Communications 
Command at COM-DG-M-CWOWatchstanders@uscg.mil.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.  Developed  by  Marine  Inspection  SME 
Sector  Mobile  and  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.    Questions  or  comments 
regarding this Safety Alert may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

for  distress  and  safety  purposes  are 

 

 

 

