 
 
 
 
 
 
April 6, 2017 
Washington, DC                            Be Aware and Take Some Care  

 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

                                 Safety Alert 03-17 

to Identify Suspect and Counterfeit Items! 

 

During  a  recent  investigation  of  a  ferry  propulsion  failure,  Coast  Guard  investigators  discovered 
evidence of falsely identified fasteners being used as part of the drive train system.  Several installed 
bolt  heads  separated  from  their  shanks  and,  as  a  result,  a  splined  hub  coupling  loosened  and 
disconnected  from  the  reduction  gear  /  transmission.    This  then  overstressed  the  stern  tube  seal, 
allowing  water  to  leak  into  the  engine  room.    Bolt  heads  generally  include  markings  that  indicate 
grade  and  manufacturer.    The  grade  is  associated  with  a  bolt’s  mechanical  properties  and 
composition.  In this instance one fastener was marked with a manufacturer listed on the Department 
of Energy’s Suspect / Counterfeit Part Headmark List and not listed in the Department of Commerce’s 
Fastener Quality Act Register of Active Fastener Insignias. 
 
Suspect / Counterfeit Items (S/CIs) are products represented as meeting specified manufacturing and 
quality requirements when, in fact, they do not.   S/CIs have been a known problem to industry and 
the government since the early 1980s.  This concern initially focused on fasteners and over time has 
been expanded to include many items, both electrical and mechanical.  The Coast Guard is routinely 
made  aware  of  various  types  of  counterfeit  equipment  and  products  in  the  marine  industry.  
Oftentimes,  such  items  are  lifesaving  products  and  fire-fighting  equipment,  which  represent  an 
extreme hazard.  S/CIs can cause: 
 

  marine casualties causing extensive damage to equipment, vessels and the environment; 
  unsafe conditions that put people at risk of injury or death; and  
  delays that impact vessel schedules and create additional operating costs. 

 
In  some  industries,  falsified  purchasing  or  identifying  documentation  has  misled  purchasers  into 
accepting  S/CIs  that  do  not  conform  to  specified  requirements.    Types  of  misrepresentation  in 
documentation include: 
 

  product sources (counterfeits); 
  product records; 
  markings as to class, type, or grade; 
 
  used products misrepresented as new products. 

labeling as to qualification or acceptance by testing / certifying organizations; and 

 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that all vessel owners, operators, and technical personnel 
maintain awareness of S/CIs and implement policies and procedures aimed at identifying them.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational, or material requirements.  Developed by Coast Guard Marine Safety 
Detachment  Fort  Macon,  the  Investigations  Division  of  Coast  Guard  Sector  North  Carolina  and  the 
Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  Questions or comments may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-
CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

