  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 10, 2002  (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 08-02 
 

EPIRB ANTENNAE FAILURES 

 

The USCG Marine Safety Office Honolulu has recently reported that 
a  high  percentage  of  antennas  equipped  to  Satellite  406  Cat  I 
EPIRBs,  product  number  2754,  manufactured  by  ACR  Electronics 
Incorporated  have 
failed  during  dockside  examinations  of 
Commercial Fishing Vessels.  

On  several  occasions  the  antenna's  outer  rubber  coating  was 
discovered  ripped  or 
inspection  often  revealed 
extensive internal corrosion. Other antennas showed no perforations 
on  the  outer  rubber  coating  but  displayed  bulges  on  the  antennae 
near  its  base.  Upon  closer  inspection  when  the  bulging  area  was 
sliced open, total wastage of the antennae interior was revealed.  

torn.  Closer 

It is reported that evidence of a corrosion failure may be discovered 
when  the  antenna  is  unscrewed  from  the  EPIRB  body  assembly. 
Rusty liquid dripping from the antenna or moisture present inside the 
threaded section are tell tale signs of failing equipment.  

ACR  Electronics  has  acknowledged  receipt  of  the  failed  antennaes 
and  has  initiated  a  study  to  determine  the  cause  and  scope  of  the 
problem.  ACR  is  committed  to  support  its  safety  products  and  will 
replace damaged antennaes at no cost to the owner. Should you encounter similar problems with 
your vessel's 2754 EPIRB antenna, contact ACR Electronics Customer Service Representatives at 
(800) 432-0227, ext. 110 to receive a replacement antenna.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  vessel  operators  carefully  inspect  their  EPIRB 
antennas - particularly if it is manufactured by ACR Electronics Incorporated.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

 

2 

