 

 
 
 
 
December 31, 2013 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

   Alert 10-13 

Attention on Deck! 

Commercial Fishing Vessels 

 
According  to  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Labor  statistics,  in  2012  commercial  fishing  was  the  second  most 
dangerous occupation in the country, with over 117 fatalities per 100,000 workers.i  This alert serves 
to remind commercial fishing vessel owners, operators, and crew members of the dangers associated 
with working around moving deck machinery, rigging, and equipment. 
 
A recent marine casualty resulting in the death of a crew member highlights the need to remain ever-
vigilant  to  unsafe  practices  and  conditions.    In  this  instance,  the  crew  member  was  standing  in  a 
hazardous location on the vessel’s working deck, near the stern between a section of interior bulwark 
and a large-diameter trawl wire which was supporting the weight of at least 1,400 pounds of deployed 
fishing gear.  As the load on the wire increased and the direction of the load path shifted due to the 
sea  state  and  the  vessel’s  motion,  the  wire  suddenly  became  taught  against  the  vessel’s  bulwark 
where the crew member had been standing.  As a result, the crew member was trapped in between 
and  suffered  fatal  injuries.    Although  the  investigation  of  this  casualty  is  not  complete  and  other 
causal  factors  may  be  discovered,  initial  findings  indicate  that  failure  to  follow  shipboard  safety 
procedures and failure to recognize a dangerous situation may have contributed to this casualty.   
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners, operators, and crew members of commercial 
fishing vessels implement the following, common-sense safety measures: 
 

•  Develop and post safety plans that include identification of “pinch points” and other dangerous 

•  Regularly  conduct  onboard  safety  training  emphasizing  on-deck  hazards  and  other  potential 

•  Remain  ever-vigilant  to  the  changing  nature  of  potential  dangers  in  the  presence  of  moving 

deck machinery, rigging, and equipment;  

•  Follow vessel safety procedures and avoid placing oneself in peril! 

 
This alert is for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international safety, 
operational, or material requirement.  Developed by the Fifth Coast Guard District, Portsmouth, VA.  
Questions  may  be  addressed  to  LCDR  Ken  Morton,  (757)  398-6284,  or  may  be  forwarded  to  D05-
DG-Prevention-DPI-PFB-Staff@uscg.mil.  
 
                                                 
i U. S. Bureau of Labor 2012 Census of Occupational Injuries: http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshcfoi1.htm#rates. The national occupational 
fatality rate is 3.2 deaths per 100,000 workers; logging is the most dangerous occupation with 128 deaths per 100,000 workers.  

locations on deck; 
 

dangers;  

 

 

