  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 3, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

GPS NAVIGATION SYSTEM USE 

      Safety Alert 04-96 
 

On October 22, 1995 a 35' vessel owned by the State of Maine and operated by a seasoned captain ran 
aground and sank on Seal Ledge in Penobscot Bay near Vinalhaven Island. The incident occurred at night 
in clear visibility in moderate sea and wind conditions. The three people onboard were able to successfully 
abandon the vessel and were rescued without injury after approximately one hour. During an investigation 
of the incident conducted by the U.S. Coast Guard it was  determined  that the operator of the  vessel was 
navigating with a recently installed GPS system. The operator was utilizing the GPS unit's "course to steer" 
function along a set of waypoints previously entered into the GPS system.  
 
The  waypoints  in  use  had  previously  been  entered  by  the  operator  through  a  practice  known  as  relative 
navigation,  which  involves  observing  a  position  with  an  electronic  navigation  system  and  entering  that 
position  as  a  waypoint.  On  future  voyages  the  vessel  is  navigated  to  that  previously  observed  waypoint 
utilizing  that  electronic  navigation  system.  At  the  time  the  waypoints  were  observed,  the  operator  of  the 
vessel had unknowingly observed and entered an erroneous position recorded at that moment by the GPS 
system. When attempting to return to that position, the GPS unit calculated the entered position correctly, 
and  the  "course  to  steer"  function  took  the  vessel  across  a  submerged  ledge.  Had  the  waypoints  in  use 
been plotted on a chart prior to the voyage the GPS system error would have been discovered by the vessel 
operator.  
 
Navigators of vessels equipped with GPS units are advised that the current system accuracies for GPS 
units are approximately 328 feet (100 meters) when attempting to navigate to a known geographic point 
(latitude  and  longitude  calculated  from  a  nautical  chart)  and  approximately  463  feet  (141  meters)when 
attempting  to  return  to  a  position  previously  observed  with  a  GPS  unit.  These  distances  are  95% 
accuracies, meaning that 95% of received position fixes will fall within 100 meters of calculated geographic 
points (specific navigation), and within 141 meters of observed geographic points (relative navigation). More 
accurate position fixes may be obtained but mariners should allow for the 95% accuracy values. Mariners 
familiar with Loran-C navigation systems are specifically cautioned that the Loran-C system provides slightly 
better  repeatable  accuracies  when  utilizing  relative  navigation  practices.  Care  should  be  taken  when 
switching to GPS units to insure that appropriate system accuracies are compensated for. All mariners are 
advised that when operating in the vicinity of navigational hazards vessels must be navigated with regard 
for the vessels position in relation to the hazard. Any electronic navigation system including GPS, may be 
subject to occasional errors in excess of designed system accuracies and should not be solely relied upon 
to determine a vessel's position.  
 
The U.S. Coast Guard advises against the use of relative navigation practices in the vicinity of navigational 
hazards. The recommended methods for calculating voyage waypoints is to calculate the positions directly 
from a nautical chart.  
 
For additional information of electronic navigation systems contact the U.S. Coast Guard, Portland Marine 
Safety  Office  Prevention  Department  at  (207)  780-3251  extension  173.  For  information  on  navigation 
courses  offered  by  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  Auxiliary  in  your  area  call  1-800-336-BOAT.  This  safety  alert  is 
provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international  safety, 
operational or material requirement. Developed  by the  Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis. For 
questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

