         

 
 
May 6, 2011 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

   Alert 03-11 

PROVIDING CPR – NO TIME TO WASTE 

 
This  Safety  Alert  serves  as  a  reminder  to  the  international  maritime  community  that  when  it  is 
necessary  to  provide  a  patient  Cardiopulmonary  Resuscitation  (CPR)  there  is  simply  no  time  to 
waste.  Every  second  which  passes  affects  the  patient’s  chance  of  survival.    According  to  the 
American Heart Association: 
 

•  Sudden  cardiac  arrest  is  most  often  caused  by  an  abnormal  heart  rhythm  called  ventricular 
fibrillation (VF). Cardiac arrest can also occur after the onset of a heart attack or as a result of 
electrocution  or  near  drowning.  When  sudden  cardiac  arrest  occurs,  the  victim  collapses, 
becomes  unresponsive  to  gentle  shaking,  stops  normal  breathing  and  after  two  rescue 
breaths, still isn’t breathing normally, coughing or moving.  

 

 

 

 

 

•  Effective  bystander  CPR,  provided  immediately  after  sudden  cardiac  arrest,  can  double  or 

triple a victim’s chance of survival. 

•  Effective bystander CPR helps maintain vital blood flow to the heart and brain and increases 

the amount of time that an electric shock from a defibrillator can be effective. 

•  Brain  death  starts  to  occur  four  to  six  minutes  after  someone  experiences  sudden  cardiac 

arrest if no CPR or defibrillation occurs during that time. 

• 

If  bystander  CPR  is  not  provided,  a  sudden  cardiac  arrest  victim’s  chances  of  survival  fall  7 
percent to 10 percent for every minute of delay until defibrillation.  

•  Few attempts at resuscitation are successful if CPR and defibrillation  are not provided within 

minutes of collapse.  

 
For additional information access the following websites:   
 
American Heart Association http://www.heart.org   American Red Cross http://www.redcross.org  
 
Regardless of other CPR training requirements, such as basic safety training required by STCW-95 
for  certain  mariners,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  all  vessel  owners  and  operators 
ensure  each  crew  member  is  properly  trained  in  CPR.  Important  changes  to  CPR  procedures  have 
taken place in late 2010. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed and distributed by the U.S.C.G. 
Headquarter’s Office of Investigations and Analysis, Washington, DC.  Questions may be addressed 
to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil.     
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us      
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 
 

 

