 

 

February 25, 2005                                                                                                                    Alert 2-05 
Washington, DC 
 
Loosening of Critical Fasteners 
 
Recently a large deep draft vessel was hoisting aboard its rigid hull inflatable (RHI) rescue boat when 
it’s lifting frame, an inverted u–shaped component, separated from the brackets that attached it to the 
deck.  As a result, the boat fell back into the water and its attending crewmember was ejected.  The 
uninjured crewmember was promptly recovered and damage to the rescue boat was negligible. 
 
 

 

 
 
MODEL: Pacific 22 NK III  
MANUFACTURER: Osborne Rescue Boat Company (The company is no longer in business.)  
LOCATION: Havant, Hampshire, United Kingdom.  
 
Each side of the lifting frame is fastened to the deck by a bolt and nut.  It appears that due to vibration 
the nuts securing the bolts backed off.  While the boat was being lifted the bolts also backed out of 
their respective holes.  Although the frame was fitted with non-weight bearing struts (not visible in the 
photographs) they were unable to handle the load and parted as the boat fell. 
 
An  investigation  revealed  no  specific  maintenance  requirements  or  manufacturer  recommendations 
for periodic inspection of the lifting frame bolts.  A vessel officer reported that limited visual inspection 
took place monthly but indicated that a “hands-on" equipment check did not occur.   
 
Crewmembers easily remedied the situation to prevent future accidental disassembly of the fastener 
by drilling a hole through the threaded end of the bolt and installing a cotter or split pin to prevent the 
fastener from backing off.  (See the following photograph.)  

(Continued) 

 

 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
To prevent a similar casualty the U.S. Coast Guard strongly recommends that vessel owner operators 
having  vessels  equipped  with  RHIs  manufactured  by  Osborne  Rescue  Boat  Company  or  other 
equipment constructed in a like manner -  
 

•  ensure that existing inspection and maintenance procedures include all critical components, 
•  carefully inspect the equipment for loosening of key components, and; 
•  where needed make authorized modifications. 

 
 
This casualty was investigated the U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Office, Hampton Roads, Virginia.   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  existing 
domestic or international safety, operational, or material requirement. 
 

******* 

