  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 8, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

FIRE HAZARD OF FOAM INSULATION 

      Safety Alert 07-96 
 

On December 1st, 1995 a 50 foot commercial fishing vessel experienced an engine room fire shortly after 
mooring  in  Portland,  Maine.  The  original  source  of  the  fire  was  determined  to  be  oily  rags  and  other 
combustible  materials  stowed  near  a  heat  source  (hydraulic  day  tank  and  wet  exhaust  assembly).  The 
combustion of the oily rags, which probably would have remained a minor fire, was found to have quickly 
spread  to  extruded  polystyrene  insulation  that  had  been  installed  in  the  engine  compartment  to  reduce 
noise in the wheelhouse and berthing areas and reduce ice melt in the fish hold.  
 
U.S.  Coast  Guard  personnel  have  recently  observed  a  number  of  commercial  fishing  vessels  on  which 
extruded  polystyrene  insulation  (rigid  board  type  insulation)  had  been  installed.  Extruded  polystyrene 
insulation,  which  is  typically  light  blue  or  pink  in  color,  is 
extremely  flammable,  and  when  ignited,  will  spread  flame 
rapidly  producing  large  amounts  of  toxic  black  smoke. 
Extruded  polystyrene  insulation  is  inappropriate  for  marine 
use,  especially  in  areas  near  potential  heat  and  ignition 
sources such as galley spaces and engine compartments.  
 
This photograph details a typical use of extruded polystyrene 
insulation on a commercial fishing vessel. In this application, 
the insulation has been installed on the engine box cover to 
reduce engine generated noise. On this vessel the insulation 
has  begun  to  melt  from  engine  heat.  In  the  event  of  a  high 
engine  temperature  or  small  fire,  the  insulation  could  ignite 
and  result  in  a  very  rapid  flame  spread.  Vessel  operators 
with  similar  insulation  installations  should  remove  this  material  as  soon  as  possible.  The  Coast  Guard's 
primary concern with the use of polystyrene insulation is that a minor fire, which normally could be easily 
contained,  may  suddenly  result  in  rapid  flame  spread  and  large  amounts  of  black  smoke  which  could 
disable  or  trap  crew  members.  Additionally,  heat  generated  by  the  combustion  of  polystyrene  insulation 
could ignite other materials, resulting in the loss of a vessel.  
 
All  vessel  owners  and  operators  are  requested  to  carefully  inspect  their  vessels  for  this  fire  hazard.  If 
extruded polystyrene insulation is found onboard your vessel it may present a fire hazard and it should be 
immediately removed and replaced with insulating materials suitable for high heat locations and marine use. 
These materials may be marked with USCG approval number 164.009. Although the use of noncombustible 
materials is not specifically required on commercial fishing vessels, their use is highly recommended.  
Coast Guard assistance is available to any vessel owner or operator to help determine if fire hazards exist 
onboard their vessels. For further information contact the U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Office at (207) 
780 3251 ext 115.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

