 

 

 

 
March 27, 2018 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

              Safety Alert 03-19 

Have a regime when the current’s abeam. 

Ensure adequate maneuvering space! 

Recently there were three marine casualties that resulted in the 
sinking of towing vessels on the Lower Mississippi River.  One 
of the casualties resulted in a fatality.  These cases are all under 
investigation by the Coast Guard, but the preliminary fact finding 
indicates  there  are  some  similarities  between  the  three 
incidents.    In  all  three  cases  towing  vessels  became  pinned 
against  another  object  in  an  aspect  that  exposed  the  vessel 
broadside  to  very  strong  currents.    Once  in  that  position,  the 
vessels could not recover and sank. 

The  high  water  conditions  on  the  Mississippi  River  present 
numerous  risks  for  towing  vessels,  including  unusually  strong 
river  currents  and  dynamic  eddies.    These  river  currents  are  often  different  from  one  section  of  the  river  to 
another; therefore it is absolutely essential that vessel operators provide a wide berth when maneuvering around 
any other vessel or object.  For reference, when a river current is flowing at 1 knot, the water is moving at 1.7 
feet per second, or approximately 100 feet per minute.  This means that in a 6 knot current, the water is moving 
about the length of a football field in just 30 seconds.  Additionally, the faster the current, the greater the forces 
acting on a vessel when it’s pinned against a stationery object. 

The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  towing  vessel  owners,  operators,  and  other  responsible 
parties take the following measures: 

  Avoid transiting between two anchored vessels, between two barge fleets, or between any other set 

of stationary objects. 

  Minimize the number of operations which require the vessel to be positioned beam-to the river current. 

  Establish minimum distances between the towing vessel and another vessel/object prior to conducting 

any operation that requires the vessel to be positioned beam-to the current. 

  Recognize the risks involved in operating under high current conditions and weigh those risks before 
attempting to cross in front of stationery objects or attempting an operation that requires the vessel to 
be positioned beam-to the current.  

This safety alert was created by U.S. Coast Guard Sector New Orleans.  This alert is provided for informational 
purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international safety, operational or material requirement.  
Questions  regarding  this  safety  alert  may  be  sent  to  the  Sector  New  Orleans  Waterways  Management 
Division at Secnola-Wpm@uscg.mil or the Sector New Orleans Inspections Division at NolaDom@uscg.mil. 

 

1 

