 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 19, 2008  
Washington, DC    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alert  12-08 

WATERTIGHT DOORS 

This  Safety  Alert  addresses  the  importance  of  properly  maintaining  and  closing  watertight  doors.  
Unfortunately, marine casualties, often resulting in loss of life and property, continue to be linked to 
improperly maintained or closed watertight doors! 

One  of  the  contributory  factors  in  a  recent  major  marine  casualty  on  an  uninspected  commercial 
fishing vessel was the failure to properly maintain and keep closed watertight doors on the vessel’s 
weather  deck.    In  this  incident  one  watertight  door  was  not  properly  dogged  down,  permitting  it  to 
open and let water flood a space below the main deck.  Another watertight door on the vessel’s main 
deck was not maintained and as a result, it leaked, permitting water to enter an adjacent space.  

Over 42% of all marine casualties on fishing vessels involve flooding that in most cases could have 
been  prevented  or  minimized  by  the  proper  use  of  watertight  doors.    Two  safety  alerts  have  been 
issued in the past two years emphasizing the importance of maintaining watertight doors and keeping 
them closed at all times while underway except when actually being used.  

As  a  result  of  this  incident  and  due  to  other  related  casualties,  the  U.  S.  Coast  Guard  strongly 
recommends vessel owners and operators to:  

Regularly inspect the condition of all watertight doors on their vessels including the gasket and knife-
edge to ensure that the doors close properly when dogged down securely.  Watertight door gaskets 
should  not  be  painted;  any  paint  discovered  on  the  gasket  should  be  removed.    Excessive  gaps 
between the gasket ends should be avoided and repaired upon discovery; 

Periodically  perform  either  a  chalk  or  light  test  on  all  watertight  doors  to  ensure  that  the  knife  edge 
makes contact with the entire door gasket;  

Ensure  that  all  dogs  or  closing  assemblies  move  freely  and  close  securely.    Routinely  lubricate  all 
watertight door fittings and hinges to ensure fluid operation; and 
 
Ensure that vessel masters provide regular training on watertight door operation and maintenance to 
their crews.  Watertight doors should be closed at all times while a vessel is underway except when 
transiting from space to space. 
 
Please  access  http://marineinvestigations.us    Safety  Alerts  >  General  Operations  >  "Securing 
Watertight Doors" and "Maintaining Vessel Watertight Integrity" for additional related information. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us  
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil  

