May 27, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 6-15 
 

 

           FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS READY 

Are you sure? 

 

This  Safety  Alert  is  being  issued  due  to  recent  safety  concerns  discovered  on  vessels  with  fixed 
CO2 fire fighting systems.  It is critical that operators of vessels with fixed CO2 systems are familiar 
with the operation of the systems; conduct periodic inspections of the systems for readiness, and 
know  the  signs  for  detecting  when  a  discharge  has  occurred.    It  is  recommended  that  the 
appropriate crew members receive training on CO2 system operation and its basic components. 
 
Recently,  during  the  annual  servicing  of  a  KIDDE  CO2  system  onboard  a  passenger  ferry,  a 
technician and Coast Guard Marine Inspector discovered that an undetected discharge of the CO2 
system  within  the  emergency  generator  room  had  taken  place.    Although  the  time  of  the 
inadvertent  discharge  could  not  be  determined,  the  cause  was  due  to  be  a  worn  internal 
mechanism within the control head. 
 
The crew was unaware of the discharge in the emergency generator room because the space did 
not  require  any  indicators  (e.g.,  alarm,  smoke/heat  detection)  to  alert  the  crew  and  nobody  was 
present at the time of discharge.  This circumstance presented three latent unsafe conditions: the 
failure could have occurred while someone was within the space, a person could have entered the 
space after the release and the space remained unprotected for an unknown period of time.   
 
Identifying the status of a fixed CO2 system can be done visually.  The control head of the valve 
has a slot that either aligns to the “SET” or the “RELEASED”  position and the indicators are the 
same  whether  it  is  an  electrically  operated  (left  photograph)  or  pneumatically  operated  control 
head (center photograph).   

 

 

The  slot  and  arrow  indicator  on 
the  released  component  above 
aligns  with  the  status  of  the  CO2 
bottle. 
 

Safety Alert 6-15 

 

Indicator Movement

indicator 

Pictured above is a release indicator for  
an ANSUL system. 
 
The  photo  on  the  right  is  an  example  of  a 
second  visual 
for  checking 
system  status.    It  indicates  the  pressure 
switch  position  for  the  CO2  system.    If  the 
indicator is in the down “SET” position, no 
CO2 has been released and the system is 
ready  for  operation.    If  the  indicator  is  in 
the up position, it indicates that the system 
has  been  “OPERATED”  and 
the 
proper  servicing  company  should  be 
contacted immediately to bring the system 
back to readiness. 
 
Due to the risks associated with an inadvertent discharge of a fixed CO2 system, the Coast Guard 
strongly recommends that owners and operators ensure that appropriate vessel personnel: 
 

that 

•  Receive  adequate  training  to  perform  routine  inspections  of  their  vessel’s  fixed  CO2 
systems  and  fully  understand  their  operation,  particularly  those  protecting  large  spaces  or 
multiple areas, 

•  Frequently  review  and  update  operating  manuals,  checklists,  and  safety  management 

systems associated with vessel extinguishing systems onboard, and 
 

•  Post clear instructions for fixed CO2 system emergency operation. 

 

This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Sector  Southeastern 
New  England  -  Prevention  Department.      For  questions  or  concerns,  please  email  LT  Kelli 
Dougherty - Kelli.M.Dougherty@uscg.mil.  Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Casualty 
Analysis, Washington DC.        
 
 

2 

 

 

