 
 
 
 
 
September 19, 2008                                                                                                                Alert 6-08 
Washington, DC  

 

COUNTERFEIT EMERGENCY ESCAPE BREATHING DEVICES (EEBDs) 

 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  has  recently  learned  that  counterfeit  Unitor  model  UNISCAPE  15H  EEBD 
Emergency Escape Breathing Devices (EEBDs) are being sold to ship operators and placed onboard 
commercial  vessels.    The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  encourages  that  all  vessel  owners  and 
operators  with  EEBDs  onboard  carefully  and  thoroughly  inspect  them  for  authenticity.  If  any  doubt 
exists as to the authenticity, they should immediately contact their emergency equipment vendors and 
/ or the manufacturer for verification or replacement. 
 
The  number  of  fake  units  sold  and  currently  onboard  vessels  is  unknown  and  could  be  substantial.  
The fake reproduction will not fit over an individual’s head and the automatic air release valve will not 
open. A crisis situation requiring the use of an EEBD will be severely compounded, potentially leading 
to death, should a crewmember inadvertently rely on a fake reproduction.   
 
Differentiating factors:   
 
An  authentic  Unitor  UNISCAPE  15H  is  contained  in  a  shiny  PVC  bag.  When  viewed  from  the  front 
with the instruction icons upside down, the zipper opens from left to right, and at the most left section 
of the zipper is a two centimeter gap covered by a clear tab that has a button closure.    
 
The fake reproduction is contained within a dull canvas-like material bag.  When viewed from the 
front with the instruction icons upside down, the zipper opens from right to left, and at the most left 
section  of  the  zipper  there  is  no  opening,  although  a  tab  made  of  what  appears  to  be  the  same 
material of the bag is present with a button closure.  This unit will not automatically activate. 
 

Note:  Authentic  Unitor  UNISCAPE  15H  EEBDs 
are  not  permitted  on  U.S.  flag  vessels  because 
they  are  not  National  Institute  for  Occupational 
Safety and Health certified.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational 
purposes only and does not relieve any domestic 
or  international  safety,  operational  or  material 
requirement.    Developed  and  distributed  by  the 
Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  United 
States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington, 
DC. 

 

******* 

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

