           

 

 

 

 

 
 
October 9, 2014   
Washington, DC                               BARGE FLEET LIGHTING 

Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Safety Alert 11-14 

for  barge  operators 

Within  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  Eighth  District  alone,  marine 
casualty  data  indicates  that  over  the  past  12  years,  44 
recreational  vessels  have  struck  (allided)  moored  barges 
within barge fleets, resulting in 26 fatalities and 44 injuries. 
 
These  serious  incidents  involving  barges  highlight  the 
critical  need 
to  properly  display 
navigation  lights  in  accordance  with  the  Inland  Navigation 
Rules.  As with all marine casualty investigations, the Coast 
Guard seeks to identify the specific causal factors involved 
in  each  incident,  including  whether  the  involved  barge 
fleets  are  sufficiently  lit.    The  Coast  Guard  would  like  to 
take  this  opportunity  to  remind  barge  operators  of  their 
obligation 
lighting  regulations.  
Furthermore,  these  tragic  casualties  are  a  strong  warning 
to  recreational  boaters  of  the  dangers  associated  with 
operating near and around barge fleets. 
                       

to  meet  current  barge 

 

 

Inadequate Barge  

Lighting Arrangement 

                                                     

In  July  2014,  the  Coast  Guard  published  changes  to  the  Inland  Navigation  Rules.  This  included 
amending  Rule  30  “Vessels  anchored,  aground,  and  moored  barges”  to  incorporate  barge  lighting 
requirements  previously  located  in  other  regulations,  including  requirements  for  an  unobstructed 
white light of sufficient intensity to be visible for at least 1 nautical mile. 
 
The Coast Guard urges owners and operators of barge fleets to complete the following actions: 

•  Review  fleet  lighting  procedures  to  ensure  that  barges  are  sufficiently  lit  and  operated  in 
accordance with the Inland Navigation Rules1, including technical requirements as prescribed 
in Annex I, as well as any applicable area-specific regulations in 33 CFR Parts 162 and 165. 2 

•  Ensure  that  barge  fleets  remain  in  compliance  with  permits  issued  by  U.S.  Army  Corps  of 

Engineers pursuant to 33 CFR Parts 320 through 332, and/or regional issuing authorities. 

The Coast Guard also strongly recommends that owners and operators of all vessels, including 
recreational  vessels,  remain  extra  vigilant  when  operating  boats  during  nighttime  hours,  times  of 
reduced  visibility,  or  when  strong  currents  exist  and  when  other  navigational  challenges  posed  by 
barge fleets are present.  
 

This  Safety Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  It was developed by the U.S. Coast Guard 
Eighth Coast Guard District, New Orleans, LA.  Questions may be addressed to LCDR Matt Denning, 
(504) 671-2152, or may be forwarded to D08-DG-District-DPI@uscg.mil. 

___________________ 
1 The current version of the Navigation Rules can be found at www.navcen.uscg.gov.   
2 Current versions of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) can be found at www.ecfr.gov. 
 

