 
 
 
 
 

 

 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

December 16, 2016 
Washington, DC 

 

                                 Safety Alert 17-16 

MAN B&W Cooling Jacket Failures 
Using the correct bolts is essential! 

 
Recently, a 738-foot bulk carrier ran aground while outbound on the Columbia River. The grounding resulted in 
limited  damage  to  the  vessel  and  no  pollution  or  loss  of  cargo.  This  casualty  occurred  primarily  because  of 
cracks  on  the  cooling  jacket  of  a  two-stroke  crosshead  design  Mitsui  MAN  B&W  MC-C  engine.  The  cracks 
caused  a  loss  of  engine  cooling  water  that  eventually  resulted  in  the  overheating  of  the  cylinder  cover.  This 
then  triggered  an  automated  slow-down  of  the  engine  and  an  unintended  loss  or  reduction  in  the  vessel’s 
propulsion  and  maneuverability.  Although  the  investigation  is  ongoing,  identical  failures  of  the  same  engine 
type  have  occurred  with  similar  results  although  the  engines  were  of  different  piston  diameters  and  cylinder 
arrangements:  about  two  years  ago  a  similar  equipment  failure  contributed  to  a  grounding  on  the  Columbia 
River, and in 2012, a vessel approaching Corpus Christi, TX lost power due to the same cause and struck a 
jack up oil rig causing extensive damage to the rig. 

On these engines, the outer surface of the lower areas of the engine’s cylinder covers, a.k.a. heads, forms the 
internal area of the cooling water circuit when the cooling jacket is installed.  Water flow from the cylinder liner 
is  directed  through  four  connections  into  the  cooling  jacket  and  then  flows  upward  into  other  areas  of  the 
cylinder  cover  before  exiting.    The  cooling  jacket  slips  over  the  bottom  of  the  cylinder  cover’s  outer  surface 
which has several o-rings that seal the coolant passages.  The cooling jacket is held in place by the use of four 
shoulder type bolts that go through the cooling jacket and into the sides of the cylinder cover. Please watch the 
following YouTube videos for more information: Video A and Video B. 

GAP 

By  design,  the  shoulders  of  these  bolts  are  longer  than  the  cooling  jacket  wall 
thickness. New replacement bolts will often have even longer shoulders.   When 
the bolts are properly tightened there will likely be a gap between the bottom of 
the bolt head and the outside of the jacket cover. (Image A) The extra shoulder 
length allows the cooling jacket to position itself concentrically on the bottom of 
the cylinder cover and facilitate any movement or slight expansion of the o-rings.  
It  also  allows  for  some  expansion  of  the  cast  iron  cooling  jacket.  If  the  cooling 
jacket is slightly positioned non-concentrically on the cylinder cover, some of the 
bolt  head’s  bottom  surface  areas  may  appear  as  if  the  bolt  is  fully  tightened 
against the outside of the jacket cover.   

In  the  past,  cooling  jackets  have  fractured  vertically  through  the  bolt  holes  that 
secure  the  jackets  to  the  cylinder  cover.  (Photographs  -  next  page.)    These 
fractures  have  caused  a  loss  and  reduction  in  cooling  water  that  eventually 
resulted in the overheating of the cylinder cover. That then caused an automated 
slow-down  of  the  engine  and  reduced  the  ship’s  maneuverability.    These 
fractures can be caused by the following: 

Inadequate coolant water treatment 

  Stress corrosion cracking 
 
  Excessive rust and scale development 
  Use of wrong bolts to secure cooling jacket 
  Blockages of coolant flow throughout jacket space and cylinder cover passages 
  Overheating / thermal expansion of cylinder cover causing excessive stress on jacket cover 

Image A: Properly secured 
cooling jacket bolt.  

 

 

1 of 2 

Photographic examples of fractures: 

Safety Alert 17 -16 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MAN B&W has developed a Service Letter related to this issue and it is available here. 

As  a result of  these casualties  the Coast Guard  strongly  recommends, regardless of engine  manufacturer, 
that vessel: 

  Owners,  managers  and  operators  ensure  that  their  vessel  engineering  staffs  have  access  to  all 
available  manufacturer  service  letters  for  propulsion,  electrical  generation,  steering  and  other  critical 
equipment; and 

  Senior engineering personnel on vessels with MAN B&W MC-C and other similarly constructed engines 
using  the  same  cooling  jacket  cover  securing  method  review  the  applicable  maintenance  procedures 
and ensure that persons assembling these components know that the shoulder bolts may not butt up 
against  the  cooling  jacket  cover,  as  breakage  may  occur  if  forced,  and  that  regular  bolts  with  no 
shoulders should never be used. 
 

This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety, operational, or material requirements.  Developed by the Investigations Division of Marine Safety Unit 
Portland,  Oregon  and  the  Coast  Guard  Headquarters  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.  
Questions or comments may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

******* 

 
 
 

2 

