         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 
 Safety Alert 12-15 

November 10, 2015 
Washington, DC                           PICKED UP PICKUP 

Dockside safety issues. 

The  maritime  industry  and  specifically  waterfront  facilities  can 
present  some  unusual  hazards  to  those  who  perform  the  wide 
array and variety of work associated with the business of shipping.  
To  illustrate  that  point,  a  pick-up  truck  was  recently  dragged  into 
the harbor by a mooring line that was being hauled in by a ship’s 
mooring  winch.    The  shore-side  line  handler  that  was  using  the 
truck  to  assist  with  the  evolution  narrowly  escaped  injury  and 
possible  death  by  quickly  jumping  out  of  the  truck  before  it  was 
dragged  off  the  terminal.    In  this  case,  the  ship  was  preparing  to 
depart  the  port  and  the  mooring  line  messenger  was  secured  to 
the  truck’s  tow  hitch.    It  is  a  common  shore  gang  line  handling 
practice used in order to assist working with heavy mooring lines. 
When the line was thrown off the bollard, the ship began to haul it 
in with the messenger still attached to the truck. 
 
Line  handlers  use  the  assistance  of  powered  machinery  (e.g., 
trucks,  forklifts,  golf  carts)  to  help  handle  mooring  lines.  The 
extreme  weights  of  the  mooring  lines  involved  and  the  lack  of 
adequate  personnel  to  safely  accomplish  this  task  lead  to  the 
unconventional line handing practices.   
 
The  Coast  Guard  is  unaware  how  often  this  type  of  incident  has  occurred  worldwide,  but  we  have 
confirmed  a  similar  event  took  place  years  ago  resulting  in  a  fatality.    Consequently,  the  Coast  Guard 
reminds  port  authorities,  marine  terminal  operators,  line  handlers,  longshoreman  and  others  associated 
with such activities to consider: 
 

•  Developing  policies  and  procedures  that  address  this  potential  hazard  and  minimize  associated 

•  Evaluating  the  need  for  utilizing  quick  release  devices  or  other  weak  link  arrangements;  and 

•  Ensuring line handlers have the ability to communicate with vessels during berthing or un-berthing 

risks; 
 

 

procedures; 
 

It  is  also  recommended  that  vessel  operators  and  deck  officers’  use  caution  and  remain  vigilant  of  all 
components  when  hauling  in,  ensuring  that  lines  and  cables  are  clear  and  free  of  attachments.  Special 
attention should be given to the mooring lines as they are coming off the dock and being hauled aboard. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Special thanks to LCDR Matt Meskun.  Developed 
and distributed by the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis, Washington DC.  Questions may be 
sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil 

 

