  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 8, 2002  (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

SMOKE SIGNAL / DANGER OF EXPLOSION 

      Safety Alert 06-02 
 

The Ikaros model Mk II Man-Overboard Smoke Signal (15-minute) made by Hansson Pyrotech 
AB  of  Sweden,  is  approved  around  the  world  for  use  on  ring  lifebuoys  deployed  from  a  ship’s 
bridge. In the United States, it holds Coast Guard approval no. 160.157/5/0.  

The  smoke  signal  is  secured  to  the  ring  lifebuoy  by  a  lanyard,  and  stowed  on  the  bridge  wing 
“upside  down”  in  a  special  bracket.  U.S.  ships  are  required  to  have  a  separate  floating  electric 
waterlight secured to the ring lifebuoy, but many other countries accept a version of the Ikaros MkII 
signal that includes two small lights for this purpose. When the ring lifebuoy is released from the 
bridge, it pulls the smoke signal from its bracket. As the signal is pulled from the bracket, the igniter 
mechanism  is  pulled  out  from  the  top  of  the  signal,  which  starts  igntion.  This  ignition  process 
produces gas and a large volume of orange-colored smoke. The pyrotechnic composition contains 
its own oxidizer, so once the ignition process is started, it can not be stopped.  

Recently, a seaman on a foreign ship in a U.S. port was sent to check the ring lifebuoy and smoke 
signal  on  the  bridge  wing.  In  the  process  of  doing  this,  he  started  to  move  the  signal  out  of  its 
bracket.  Since  movement  of  only  10  mm  is  necessary  to  start  ignition  of  the  signal,  it  began  to 
produce gas and smoke. The seaman apparently tried to stop the production of smoke by forcing 
the  igniter  mechanism  back  into  the  signal.  This  caused  pressure  to  build  up  rapidly  inside  the 
body of the signal, and it exploded. The seaman died of his injuries.  

Hansson  has  developed  and  is  producing  a  modified  signal  that  includes  a  pressure  relief 
mechanism. If pressure builds up inside the container due to the smoke orifice being blocked after 
the signal is ignited, two plugs will blow out and prevent the signal from exploding. This new signal 
is designated as the MkIII.  

•  The Coast Guard recommends replacement of MkII signals with MkIII signals.  
•  Whenever Hansson Man-Overboard signals (MkII or MkIII) or their mounting arrangements 
are  being  serviced,  the  transport  safety  pin  should  be  inserted  in  the  signal,  which  will 
prevent  it  from  being  accidentally  ignited.  The  transport  safety  pin  is  used  when  smoke 
signals  are  shipped.  The  pin  is  removed  when  the  signal  is  placed  in  service.  Crew  are 
advised  to  keep  these  pins  for  use  during  signal  maintenance.  Consideration  should  be 
given to stowing the pin in the vicinity of the signal and the bracket.  
If MkII signals are continued in use, a sign should be placed in a location where it can be 
readily  seen  in  the  vicinity  of  the  stowage  location  of  the  signal,  warning  against  trying  to 
move the signal without the transport safety pin inserted. The warning placard should also 
include  directions  for  handling  the  marker  in  the  event  of  an  accidental  ignition  (e.g.  “DO 
NOT RETURN TO BRACKET, EXPLOSION WILL OCCUR”). Such warnings are located on 
the body of the signal, but they are in a position not normally visible to someone working on 

• 

1 

the signal. The sign(s) should be in a language or languages that can be understood by the 
crew.  

This  alert  was  developed  by  the  USCG  Lifesaving  and  Fire  Safety  Standards  Division.  Content 
questions may be addressed to LCDR Brian Gilda - gilda@comdt.uscg.mil. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

