 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 25, 2017 
Washington, DC                      
 

 Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 10-17 

Oh, They’re Just Seasick.  Or Not?  

Carbon Monoxide – an unseen and deadly hazard you cannot spot! 

 

the  other 

Recently along the Gulf Coast multiple passengers on board 
an  uninspected  passenger  vessel  (UPV)  were  hospitalized 
due  to  carbon  monoxide  (CO)  poisoning.    One  of  the 
persons  had  a  26%  CO  level  (amount  of  CO  bound  to 
hemoglobin  or  red  blood  cells)  in  their  blood  stream.  
Additionally,  it  was  discovered  that  one  of  the  passengers 
became  unconscious  and 
four  passengers 
experienced  heavy  fatigue  and  vomiting  as  a  result  of  the 
CO exposure.  
 
Coast  Guard  Marine  Inspectors  conducted  an  exam  of  the 
vessel  and  found  it  to  be  in  compliance  with  the  ventilation 
requirements  set  forth  in  46  CFR  Subchapter  C  as  they 
pertain to UPVs.  The Coast Guard team then requested that 
the  master  get  underway  in  order  to  take  readings  with  a 
personal  four  gas  meter.    While  underway  the  meter 
indicated significantly high parts per million CO in the vessel’s fishing area, the flying bridge, and interior cabin 
spaces.  The  team  directed  the  master  to  cease  all  operations  until  the  causal  factors  behind  the  hazardous 
condition could be addressed and corrected.  
 
As depicted in the photograph above, the sport fishing vessel had a platform mounted near the water level on 
the transom which supported a large fish container.  There was a small space between the platform and the 
vertical surface of the transom.  When the vessel was underway carbon monoxide from the exhaust would get 
trapped under the platform because its outer edges were submerged in water.  As a result, the exhaust vented 
vertically up through the gap instead of venting away from the vessel’s stern like a traditional exhaust would.  
Due to the draft and eddies created by the vessel when underway the exhaust circulated up over the stern and 
spread throughout the fishing area, flying bridge, and cabin.  
 
Swim decks and other obstacles mounted to the stern can alter exhaust flow, putting passengers and crew at 
significant  risk.    Additionally,  since the  symptoms  of  sea  sickness  are similar  to  other  types  of  illnesses  they 
could be misdiagnosed as something far more innocuous than carbon monoxide poisoning. 
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that owner / operators with similarly outfitted vessels: 
 

•  Determine if this type of risk is present on their vessels; 
•  Always monitor the general health of passengers and crew; 
•  Consider the use of Carbon Monoxide alarms in cabin areas; and 
•  Never assume that “it’s just sea sickness,” when the circumstance could be far more dangerous. 

 
This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety, operational, or material requirements.  Developed by the Sector Corpus Christi Investigations Division 
and Coast Guard District 8 Prevention Division.  Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil.  

 

