 
 
 
 
 
 
March 28, 2017 
Washington, DC                             

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 02-17 

Failure to Follow Stove / Oven Installation Instructions 

Overcooks Galley! 

 

revealed 

these  platforms 

Wall 
 

Stove 
 

This safety alert serves as an important notice to those 
that  may  lease  and  occupy  portable  accommodation 
modules  on  board  fixed  Outer  Continental  Shelf  (OCS) 
platforms.  A recent Coast Guard investigation into a fire 
onboard  one  of 
the 
manufacturer  of  the  module  (a  combination  galley  and 
mess deck) had improperly installed a commercial grade 
electric  stove.    As  a  result,  the  platform’s  crew  was 
awakened  by  the  sound  of  smoke  alarms  from  a  galley 
fire.  They acted quickly to isolate and fight the fire and 
were assisted by a Good Samaritan vessel.  The crew’s 
rapid  response  limited  the  damage,  which  could  have 
been much worse. 
 
Per  the  appliance’s  rear  data  plate,  the  recommended  safe  clearance  between  the  appliance  and 
combustible  construction  material  is  six  inches.    The  actual  clearances  to  the  adjacent  walls,  which 
were made of combustible wood and fiber-reinforced plastic, were one inch from the appliance’s side 
and  less  than  an  inch  from  its  rear.    Moreover,  the  wall  surfaces  were  covered  with  stainless  steel 
sheet metal, which conducted the appliance’s heat and caused the walls to ignite. 
 
the  construction  of 
Coast  Guard  guidance 
accommodation  modules  indicates  such  modules  must 
not  compromise  the  safety  of  the  host  vessel  and  the 
personnel  on  board.    The  USCG  Marine  Safety  Center 
(MSC)  oversees 
for  design  and 
construction  of  portable  shelters  for  floating  MODUs 
including 
the  approval  of  construction  materials.  
Unfortunately, for fixed platforms like this one, there is no 
plan  review  process  for  the  construction  of  modules.  
Manufacturers  may  design  and  construct  them  without 
regulatory oversight.     
 
The Coast Guard’s investigation identified several casual 
factors including the failures to do the following:  
  

Stove / Oven 
 

Range Hood 
 

the  guidelines 

for 

•  Follow  the  installation  directions  as  indicated  on 
the warning plate and repeated in the Vulcan stove 
and oven installation manual;   

 

Safety Alert 02-17 

 

Housing 
Module 
 

Galley 
Module 
 

•  Recognize  potential  heat 

stainless  steel  sheeting 
material of the walls; and 

transfer 

from 

the 
the  combustible 

to 

•  Validate  the  correct  installation  of  the  stove  and 

oven. 

 
As  a  result,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends 
that  owners  and  operators  having  similar  portable 
accommodations  ensure 
that  all  commercial  grade 
stoves  and  ovens  are 
the  proper 
installed  with 
clearances to prevent ignition of combustible materials. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes 
only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international 
safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed 
by the Sector New Orleans  Prevention Department and 
distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty 
Analysis,  Washington  DC.  Questions  may  be  sent  to 
HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

 

2 

