 

 
 
 
 
May  22,  2013                                                                                                                                                                                          04-13 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Navigation Lights – Not! 

 
The  Coast  Guard  has  recently  become  aware  of  the  uninspected  towing  vessel  industry  using 
inappropriate navigation lights that fail to meet the criteria for use onboard any vessel; SEACHOICE 
Products LED Navigation Light, SCP #03201 shown below. Online research shows many outlets for 
the sale of this product.  It is possible that this product may be in widespread use in the recreational 
boating industry as well. 

The SEACHOICE Products and other catalogs advertise it as a “LED 
classic  navigation  light.”  Packaged  individually,  the  item  looks  as 
shown  on  the  left.    The  package  indicates  incorrect  usage  as  a 
“masthead  light.”    When  web-searched  the  retrieved  information 
presents  it  as  a  “masthead”  or  “navigation”  light.    Neither  of  these 
applications  are  correct  and  the  fixture  should  not  be  used  on  any 
vessel in an effort to meet the navigation rules. 
 
Masthead lighting requires an arc of 225 degrees visibility and stern 
lighting requires an arc 135 degrees visibility, for a total range of 360 
degrees  visibility.  Depending  on  the  type  of  vessel  there  are  also 
light, color and range of visibility requirements.    
 
The  SEACHOICE  product  SCP  03201  has  an  arc  of  180  degrees 
visibility and is not applicable to any requirement. 
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners / operators of 
any  vessel  who  installed  this  particular  SEACHOICE  product  
(#03201 only)  as a masthead, stern or other type of navigation light 
to  remove  it  and  replace  it  with  a  proper  light  that  meets  the 
requirements for the vessel and application. 
 
 

Recreational  boaters  who  have  questions  should  contact  the  Coast  Guard  Auxiliary.  Commercial 
vessel  owner  /  operators  who  have  questions  should  contact  the  Coast  Guard  Sector  or  Marine 
Safety Unit.  
 
Standards for color, intensity and arc of visibility can be found in Annex I of COLREGs or: 

•  33CFR84.13 - Color specification of lights 
•  33CFR84.15 - Intensity of lights 
•  33CFR84.17 - Horizontal sectors 
•  33CFR84.19 - Vertical sectors 

 

Special thanks to Coast Guard Sector Detroit for identifying this issue. 
 
This  document  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and  Casualty  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC.    Questions  can 
be addressed to the sender.                                                                                                                                                       

