 
           

 

 

 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

May 16, 2014 
 
Washington, DC                          SLIPS, TRIPS and FALLS 

 

 

   Alert 07-14 

Not too difficult to prevent. 

 

 
Coast  Guard  casualty  investigators  recently  responded  to  an 
incident  whereby  a  tour  boat  customer  fell  into  an  unprotected 
two step stair well and received significant injuries.  Although the 
customer was taking photographs at the time and may have lost 
situational awareness there were no defenses to prevent the fall.  
The  hazard  was  not  previously  identified  and,  as  is  often  said, 
was  an  accident  waiting  to  happen.  Only  afterwards  did  the 
owner operator install a small lifeline cable across the opening.  

This type of vessel design, with a stair well leading to the head, is 
very  common.  These  specific  catamaran  vessels  were 
constructed by Cooper Marine, Inc. and Corinthian Catamarans, 
Inc. (formerly Corinthian Yachts, Inc.) in various sizes over many 
years. There  may  be  hundreds  of  these  vessels  in  operation  as 
tour boats, water taxis, dive boats, etc., world over. 

stair well

Hazards  causing  slips,  trips,  and  falls  
require  no  special  skills  to  be  identified 
and  may  exist  in  all  marine  operations. 
The  mitigation  and  prevention  of  such 
hazards and resultant incidents may often be a very simple matter with minimal or no costs.  Only an 
awareness to such risks is required by vessel employees followed by an owner operator commitment 
to addressing identified concerns. 
 
As a result of this incident and many others like it the Coast Guard strongly recommends that owner 
operators; 

 

• 

identify similar stair well hazards and secure them in a manner that will prevent slips, trips and 
falls; 

•  when a hazard cannot be completely eliminated (as with the image above), bring the hazard to 

the attention of passengers during the initial safety brief; and 

•  make  risk  awareness  part  of  your  operational  culture  by  having  vessel  personnel  frequently 

evaluate the vessel’s condition with the express purpose of identifying and mitigating hazards. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis with the assistance of CG Sector Jacksonville Investigation Division personnel. 
For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 
 

