 
 
 
 
 
March 21, 2013                                                                                                               Alert 01-13 
Washington, DC 

                           Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Counterfeit Portable Fire Extinguishers 

 
The Coast Guard has recently become aware of counterfeits of U.S. Coast Guard approved portable 
fire extinguishers manufactured by Amerex Corporation and Buckeye Fire Equipment.  Both compa-
nies  are  major  producers  of  genuine  approved  fire  extinguishing  equipment  and  serve  a  worldwide 
market.  These counterfeit extinguishers present a significant safety hazard.  Their capability to extin-
guish  a  fire  is  unproven;  they  may  be  charged  with  a  powdery  substance  that  is  not  a  fire 
extinguishing  agent,  the  pressure  cylinder  is  not  DOT  approved,  and  the  pressure  gauge  may  not 
function or give false readings.  
 
The dry-chemical counterfeit extinguishers are size B-II and may be identified by several distinguish-
ing features:  
 
Counterfeit  units  may  have  duplicate  serial  numbers.    Genuine 
approved extinguishers will have a unique serial number for each 
extinguisher.  For counterfeit Amerex extinguishers, the serial № 
V-654690 has been reported.  There may be other serial numbers 
used on the counterfeits.  For counterfeit Buckeye extinguishers, 
the  serial  №  K-094927  with  a  red  handle  and  serial  №  YM-
U76222 with a black handle have been reported.   
 
The  labels  on  counterfeit  extinguishers  may  be  simply  printed. 
Labels  on  genuine  approved  extinguishers  will  include  a  security 
imprint / texture behind the UL LISTED logo, classification, testing 
and  approval  data.    Genuine  Amerex  Corporation  extinguishers 
will have a pattern of scored “circles,” and genuine Buckeye Fire 
Equipment  extinguishers  will  have  the  letter  “S”  scored  into  the 
label.  
 
 
 
The  bottoms  of  the  counter-
feits  have  a  rounded  curved-
in  lip  as  shown  on  the  right 
side of the image on the right.  
The  bottom  of  a  genuine 
Amerex extinguisher is shown 
on  the  left  side  of  the  image.  
Genuine  Buckeye  extinguish-
ers  will  have  a  date  stamped 
on the bottom.   
 
 
 
 

Counterfeit 

Genuine 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
The counterfeit extinguishers have been reported to have black or red 
plastic handles.  Genuine approved dry-chemical B-II extinguishers typ-
ically  have  handles  that  are  constructed  of  silver-colored  aluminum 
(although there are some with plastic handles).  
 
 
 
Pressure gauges on the counterfeit units may be the wrong color.  The 
gauges  on  genuine  approved  Buckeye  dry-chemical  extinguishers  will 
have a red background. 
 
 
 
 
Counterfeit extinguishers may have welded seams on the sides of the 
cylinders.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
The Coast Guard believes that counterfeit production is not limited to Amerex Corporation and Buck-
eye Fire Equipment.  There has been unconfirmed mention of a possible case with Badger portable 
fire  extinguishers.    However,  at  this  time  there  have  been  no  confirmed  reports  of  counterfeit  units 
from other manufacturers.  
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that vessel owner / operators inspect their equipment. In-
spectors,  surveyors,  owner  /  operators  and  others  suspecting  that  they  may  have  identified 
counterfeit extinguishers should contact the Coast Guard Office of Design and Engineering Standards 
immediately.  Please  provide  a  description  of  the  suspect  units,  including  if  possible  photographs 
showing full front, rear, and bottom views of the extinguishers, along with close-ups of all labels, and 
submit this information to typeapproval@uscg.mil with a copy to anticounterfeiting@us.ul.com.  
 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes and does not relieve any foreign or domestic 
requirement.  Developed by the Lifesaving and Fire Safety Division, U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters, 
Washington, DC and distributed by the Office of Investigations and Causal Analysis,  
 

 
                                                                       ******* 

