  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 9, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 10-14 
 

PREVENTING BARGE EXPLOSIONS 

in 

for 

managers 

Recent  casualties  involving  explosions  aboard  barges  conducting  tank  cleaning  operations 
alongside  marine  terminals  have  resulted  in  serious  injuries  to  vessel  crews  and  facility  workers, 
catastrophic property damage, as well as harm to the environment.  A review of related casualties 
has  revealed  that  vessel  personnel,  facility  personnel  and  shore  side  managers  failed  to  ensure 
that  established  procedures  and  safe  practices  were  followed.    Specifically,  the  Operational 
Manuals  and  regulatory  requirements  were  not  routinely  followed  by  those  involved.    As  a  result 
unintended and disastrous consequences occurred.  
 
This  safety  alert  aims 
to 
raise  awareness  regarding 
this 
issue  and  highlight 
critical  lessons  learned  from 
these incidents.  Facility and 
vessel 
and 
operators,  both  ashore  and 
afloat,  responsible 
the 
oversight  of,  or  specifically 
involved 
tank  cleaning, 
stripping  or  gas  freeing  of 
flammable  cargoes,  should 
take  note  and  ensure  the 
widest  distribution 
to  all 
personnel. 
 
Title 33 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 154 – Facilities Transferring Oil or Hazardous 
Material  in  Bulk;  requires  facilities  to  submit  for  approval  to  the  Captain  of  the  Port  (COTP),  an 
Operations  Manual  that  provides  facility  details,  types  of  cargos  handled,  duties/knowledge 
requirements  of  specific  personnel,  locations  of  emergency  shutdowns,  descriptions  of  tank 
cleaning  procedures,  emergency  procedures,  and  other  requirements  for  each  type  of  cargo 
evolution,  tank  cleaning,  and  vapor  control  processes.    For  facilities  that  conduct  tank  cleaning, 
stripping,  or  gas  freeing  operations  on  tank  vessels,  the  Operations  Manual  must  contain  a 
description  of  their  procedures  that  are  consistent  with  the  International  Safety  Guide  for  Oil 
Tankers and Terminals (ISGOTT).  Specific sections of the Fifth edition are referenced in 33 CFR 
Part 154.   
 
The most common causal factor associated with these tank barge explosions is that the Person in 
Charge (PIC) of the facility and/or tank barge failed to follow key Operating Manual procedures. 
 
 
 

1 

endorsement.   

transfer of cargo or slops. 

immediate vicinity. 

 
 
 
As  a  result  of  these  casualties  the 
Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends 
that  facility  and  vessel    managers, 
operators  and  PIC’s  performing  tank 
cleaning,  stripping,  or  gas  freeing  of 
flammable cargos on board any vessel 
review  ISGOTT  Fifth  edition  and  fully 
comply  with  all  related  regulations  and 
Operating Manuals while also ensuring 
(among many other items): 
 
•  Operations Manual is complete and meets regulatory requirements. 
•  Facility personnel training programs meet regulatory requirements. 
•  Facility PIC is designated and properly trained. 
•  Barge PIC holds a required valid USCG Merchant Mariner’s Credential with a Tankerman-PIC 

 

•  Barge  or  vessel  is  properly  grounded  by  a  bonding  wire  or  other  approved  method  prior  to 

•  Spark  producing  tools  and  machinery  are  removed  from  the  involved  barge  or  vessel  and 

•  Portable fans or blowers used to ventilate tanks are intrinsically safe and properly grounded. 
•  Minimizing  the  operation  of  other  vessels  near  the  facility  during  tank  cleaning  or  gas  freeing 

operations to reduce potential vapor ignition sources. 

•  Operating manual procedures for dropping / draining and cleaning of cargo lines and piping and 

tank cleaning are strictly followed. 

•  During  tank  cleaning  (washing)  and  gas-freeing  operations,  consistent  with  ISGOTT  Ch  11.3, 
conduct  water  flushing  of  the  tank  bottom  and  piping  systems  while  monitoring  the  Lower 
Flammable Limit (LEL) prior to commencing forced ventilating.   

•  A Certified Marine Chemist certifies tanks as "Safe for Workers," "Safe for Hotwork" before 

personnel enter that tank or conduct hot work.   

 
Facility  and  vessel  operators  may  submit  a  written  request  for  the  COTP  to  consider  alternative 
procedures,  methods,  or  equipment  standards  than  those  established  within  the  ISGOTT  or 
regulations.  The COTP will evaluate any proposed alternative to ensure it provides an equivalent 
level of safety and pollution protection as required by the regulations.   
 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    It  was  developed  by  the  U.S.  Coast 
Guard  Eighth  District  Prevention  division  in  coordination  with  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Analysis, Washington DC.  For questions or concerns, please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

 

2 

