 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 3, 2017 
Washington, DC                           

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

                                          

Safety Alert 01-17 

The Best Laid Plans for Safety 

Are Only as Good as Their Implementation! 

 
Recently,  while  a  bulk  carrier  was  at  anchor  off  the  coast  of  Texas,  a 
crewmember that could not swim was put over the rail in a Bosun’s Chair to 
paint the vessel’s mid-ship draft marks and load lines.  Unfortunately, when 
his  shipmates  on  deck  commenced  to  haul  him  up,  the  Bosun’s  Chair  line 
parted and he fell into the water.  He survived the fall and attempted to swim 
towards a life ring that had been thrown to him, but he ultimately submerged 
and was lost. Other crewmembers attempted to launch a rescue craft, but it 
failed to operate.   
 
Putting a crewmember over the rail to paint while a vessel is at anchor is a 
typical shipboard operation, and this instance is a classic example of where 
following  SMS  procedures  could  have  prevented  a  death  or  injury.  
Investigators found that the Captain and Chief Mate had met and developed 
a  suitable  work  plan.    This  information  was  later  communicated  from  the 
Chief Mate to the crewmembers involved.  The plan had several important 
elements,  including  inspecting  the  Bosun’s  Chair  and  manila  rope  rigging 
and  requiring  that  the  crewmember  going  over  the  rail  wear  a  personal 
floatation device (PFD) and use a safety harness and lifeline; however, the 
plan  was  not  implemented.    Crewmembers  failed  to  adequately  check  the 
strength  of  the  Bosun’s  Chair  line,  instead  simply  pulling  on  it.    Also,  the 
deceased crewmember was not wearing a PFD, and, even though he wore 
a safety harness along with a lifeline, the lifeline went untended and was not 
tied off to the vessel.  The vessel’s Bosun was not present, and it remains 
unknown as to who was supervising the operation.  Finally, months before 
this tragedy, the Chief Mate had placed a requisition request for new manila 
line and for PFD work vests that were designed to be worn with the vessel’s 
safety harness; however, the request went unfilled.       
 
As  a  result  of  this  casualty,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  reminds  vessel 
owners  and/or  operators  and  all  personnel  onboard  vessels  everywhere  to 
do the following: 

•  Properly use safety equipment. 
•  Ensure adequate supervision of work teams. 
•  Develop  workplace  mindsets  that  properly  develop  and  execute 

plans, including those for worst case scenarios. 
Implement barriers to prevent such scenarios. 

• 
•  Fully 

requirements. 

implement  and  adhere 

to  Safety  Management  System 

 
This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.    Developed  by  the  Investigations  Division  of  the  Coast  Guard 
Marine Safety Unit Port Arthur and the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  Questions or comments 
may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

