                      

 
 
February 14, 2011 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

   Alert 02-11 

Air Receivers and Relief Valves 
A reminder that shouldn’t be necessary! 

 
This  Safety  Alert  addresses  safety  issues  relating  to  air  receivers  on  Uninspected  Towing  Vessels 
(UTV), but may apply to air receivers on any vessel.  Air receivers, regardless of specific use onboard 
a UTV, contain extreme amounts of potential energy; an uncontrolled release of this energy may lead 
to  serious  injury,  death  and  catastrophic  vessel  damage.    Although  this  issue  involves  basic  safety 
and good marine practice, too many related problems have been recently discovered. 
 
Not  long  ago,  an  air  receiver  unexpectedly  ruptured  with  terrible 
results  onboard  an  UTV  on  the  Upper  Mississippi  River.    A 
crewmember was seriously injured and paralyzed.  Several causal 
factors  were  noted  during  the  casualty  investigation;  the  lack  of  a 
relief  valve  to  protect  the  system  and  significant  corrosion  within 
the receiver.  It’s important to note that on unprotected systems, all 
it 
the 
compressor’s pressure switch/contactor or unloader to fail and not 
shut  off  the  machine.    Further,  internal  corrosion  on  aged  tanks 
present  a  latent  unsafe  condition  and  may  go  unnoticed  if  not 
inspected.                                      (Parted air receiver.) 
 
As  a  result  of  this  casualty  and  other  similar  incidents,  the  U.  S. 
Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  UTV  Owner/Operators, 
vessel  engineers, 
inspectors 
ensure that: 
 

insurance  surveyors  and  other 

to  be  over-pressurized 

the  system 

takes 

for 

for 

is 

•  A proper sized pressure relief device is installed on all air receivers. The pressure relief device 
should not be rated higher than the Maximum Allowed Working Pressure (MAWP) stamped on 
the air receiver’s data plate; 

 
•  A  data  plate  is  attached  to  the  receiver  and  pressure  relief 
devices.  If  missing  or  damaged  the  UTV  representative 
should  provide  evidence  to  prove  the  components  were 
constructed 
this 
equipment should be taken out of service or replaced; 

to  an  approved  standard.  Otherwise 

•  The  data  plate  associated  with  the  receiver  and  pressure 
relief  device  remain  unpainted  and  legible.  Take  care  to 
minimize damage to the plates if paint needs to be removed.  
Pressure  relief  devices  should  not  be  painted  as  paint  can 
interfere with the lifting of the valve. Those that are painted 
should be lift tested to ensure proper operation; 

1

 

 

 

•  Pressure relief devices are not capable of being isolated or their operation prevented by being 

wired or secured in a position that prevents the valve from opening; 

 

RELIEF VALVES MUST NEVER BE SECURED IN THE CLOSED POSITION 

 

 
 
 

2

               

 

 
•  Each  receiver  is  equipped  with  a  drain  valve  to  remove  condensate  and  all  crewmembers 
making rounds in the machinery space are instructed to drain the condensate as part of their 
regular machinery space duties; 
 

•  All  repairs  and  alterations  to  air  receivers  and  pressure  relief  devices  are  conducted  by 
companies  holding  the  National  Board  of  Boiler  and  Pressure  Vessel  “R”  Certificate  for  air 
receivers and the “VR” Certificate for pressure relief devices; and 
 

•  Owner/Operators  establish  maintenance  programs  based  on 

the  manufacturer’s 
recommendations  for  such  equipment  that  includes  routine  internal  and  external  receiver 
inspections.  External  inspections  should  include  surface  examinations  for  evidence  of 
deterioration such as cracks, blisters, corrosion erosion, dents, etc., with particular attention to 
the support attachments and welds.  
 

Owner/Operators  should  be  aware  of  these  potential  safety  hazards  and  take  proper  action  as 
needed.    Failure  to  address  these  concerns  could  result  in  a  hazardous  condition,  and  the  Coast 
Guard determining Operational Controls are necessary.  If in doubt, contact your local Coast Guard 
office or the Towing Vessel National Center of Expertise at (270) 444-7715. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Towing  Vessel  National 
Center of Expertise.  Distributed by the U.S.C.G. Headquarters Office of Investigations and Analysis, 
Washington, DC.  Questions may be addressed to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil.      
 

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us      
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

 

