 

 

 
 
 
 
June 17, 2013 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

        

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

           05-13 

RECENT FAILURES OF DYNAMIC POSITIONING (DP) SYSTEMS ON 

MOBILE OFFSHORE DRILLING UNITS 

 
This Safety Alert addresses dynamic positioning  incidents resulting in a loss of position on drillships.  
A  loss  of  position  during  a  critical  activity  may  result  in  a  loss  of  well  control  and  severe 
consequences  including  loss  of  life,  pollution,  and  property  damage.  Critical  activities  are  those 
activities  where  the  consequences  of  equipment  failure  or  loss  of  position  are  greater  than  under 
normal operating circumstances.  Two examples would be a MODU conducting well operations with 
non-shearables  through  the  blowout  preventer  (e.g.,  the  blowout  preventer's  shear  ram(s)  cannot 
shear)  or  when  the  time  to  terminate  operations  is  unacceptable  (e.g.,  the  MODU  crew  cannot 
reposition the non-shearable away from the BOP's shear ram in the time required to disconnect). 
 
Recent incidents involving drillship loss of position and emergency disconnects have highlighted the 
importance  of  operating  a  dynamically  positioned  drillship  within  its  design  limits,  ensuring  dynamic 
positioning  compentency  levels  and  ensuring  approprate  precautions  are  taken  during  maintenance 
and  testing  of  critical  equipment.  A  loss  of  position  on  a  dynamically  positioned  drillship  can  be 
mitigated  by  following  dynamic  positioning    system  guidance  published  in  the  ‘‘DP  Operations 
Guidance Prepared through the Dynamic Positioning Committee of the Marine Technology Society to 
aid  in  the  safe  and  effective  management  of  DP  Operations,’’  March  2012  Part  2  Appendix  1 
(dynamically positioned MODUs), available at: 
 
 http://www.dynamic-positioning.com/dp_operations_guidance.cfm .   
 
See our notice in the Federal Register (77 FR 26562) available at:  
 
http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg521/docs/DP_FR_Notice_2012-10669.pdf . 
 
In two recent incidents, dynamically positioned drillships lost functional thrusters due to an electrical 
disturbance when attempting to reconnect a faulty thruster after maintenance.  When the thruster was 
reconnected it was not electrically isolated from other thrusters and the thrusters did not “ride through” 
the  disturbance  causing  loss  of  thrust.    During  these  incidents  the  drillship  crews  were  unable  to 
restore all functional thrusters and as a consequence these drillships lost position and had to initiate 
the emergency disconnect sequence (EDS).   
 
In another incident a dynamically positioned drillship encountered severe weather with high, shifting 
winds that caused it to lose position and initiate the EDS.  Despite receiving a weather alert for severe 
thunderstorms  and  high  winds  well  before  this  incident,  only  half  of  the  available  diesel  generators 
were  on  line  when  the  storm  hit  and  the  DP  Operator  (DPO)  ordered  a  significant  heading  change 
with a high rate of turn when the drillship began to lose position.  The drillship was unable to achieve 
the ordered heading or bring all generators online before it lost position and had to initiate the EDS. 
 

Page 1  

 

Based  on  these  incidents,  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  recommends  that  owners  and  operators  of 
dynamically positioned MODUs operating on the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf: 
 

• 

Include appropriate material on preventing these incidents in training programs for DPOs and 
other  key  DP  personnel.    Training  programs  should  maximize  use  of  DP  simulators  to  gain 
proficiency in maintaining heading (dynamically positioned drillships) and ensuring  equipment 
is  ready  ahead  of  severe  weather,  ensuring  communications  with  the  drill  floor  (e.g.  use  of 
“blue  advisory”/risk  assessment)  and  re-establishing  thrust  in  emergency  situations.  (See 
Marine  Technology  Society  (MTS)  MODU  Operations  Guidance  Section  4.13  and  IMCA  M 
117 Rev.1 Appendix 4). 

•  Develop  and  implement  a  Critical  Activity  Mode  of  Operation  (CAMO)  and  a  Well  Specific 
Operating Guideline per MTS, “DP Operations Guidance” to ensure that the most reliable DP 
system  configuration  is  used  during  critical  activities.    Develop  and  utilize  a  CAMO  for  any 
activity you or your lessee identifies as critical.  When developing a CAMO, consider requiring 
open bus operation during critical activities to prevent a worst case failure with a potential for 
zero  thrust  in  excess  of  your  drift  off  time  to  the  Point  of  Disconnect  (See  MTS  DP  MODU 
Operations  Guidance  Section  4.8  and  Appendix  C  “Example  of  a  CAMO”,  “Power 
Distribution”).  

o 

It  may  be  possible  to  make  a  common  power  system  fully  fault  tolerant  in  respect  of 
single failure criteria for DP Class 2 and DP Class 3.  However, in such designs fault 
tolerance depends on a very comprehensive range of protective functions and on many 
items  of  equipment  being  able  to  perform  to  capacity.    Operating  the  power  plant  as 
two or more independent power systems reduces dependence on protective functions 
and  vulnerability  to  hidden  failures.    It  does  not  remove  all  common  points  between 
redundant  systems.    The  potential  to  lose  one  part  of  the  system  is  higher  but  the 
potential  to  lose  the  complete  system  is  reduced  (See  MTS  “DP  Vessel  Design 
Philosophy Guidelines” Section 10.8). 

•  Perform testing aboard MODUs to ensure functional thruster drives will ride-through a system 
disturbance.  This  testing  should  indicate  how  the  system  will  react  during  a  significant  bus 
disturbance such as a short circuit on the main switchboard.  Where ride-through capability is 
an essential part of the DP redundancy concept it should be proven by live short circuit and 
ground fault testing per Section 9.2.5 of the MTS “DP Vessel Design Philosophy Guidelines”.  
This testing should be incorporated into the vessel DP Proving Trial (5-year). 

•  Perform regular thermal imaging surveys of DP system electrical equipment (e.g., switchgear, 
drives, motor controllers, etc.) as part of a preventative maintenance program to provide early 
detection of faulty or loose connections. 

 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes and does not relieve any foreign or domestic 
requirement.    Developed  by  the  Coast  Guard  Outer  Continental  Shelf  National  Center  of  Expertise. 
For additional information contact Commander James Rocco: james.v.rocco@uscg.mil . 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis:  http://Marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

Page 2              

