  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 3, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 03-96 
 

PORTABLE SPACE HEATERS 

 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  recently  identified  a  number  of  sea  urchin  vessels 
with an extremely dangerous fire hazard resulting from the use of portable 
propane  space  heaters.  Portable  space  heaters  are  frequently  utilized 
onboard  vessels  in  this  fishery  to  warm  divers  and  to  keep  sea  urchins 
from freezing.  
 
Coast  Guard  personnel  have  observed,  at  sea,  a  number  of  fishing 
vessels  using  these  portable  heaters  while  also  carrying  portable  fuel 
containers, including those used to carry gasoline for outboard engines. If 
gasoline  or  other  flammable  liquids  are  carried  onboard  a  vessel  it  is 
critically  important  to  ensure  that  these  items  are  well  separated  from 
any  potential  ignition  sources  and  secured  or  lashed  in  place  to  prevent 
shifting.  
 
Accidental  spillage  of  any  flammable  liquid,  especially  gasoline,  in  the 
vicinity  of  an  open  flame  source  can  result  in  a  catastrophic  fire  that  will 
quickly  engulf  a  vessel.  To  research  the  hazard,  Coast  Guard  personnel 
recently  conducted  a  controlled  experiment  utilizing  a  17  foot  open  wood  skiff.  In  this  test,  a  portable 
propane space heater was placed in the vessel with two partially filled gasoline containers to recreate the 
conditions observed in the top photograph. In this experiment, one gasoline container and the ignited space 
heater were tipped at the same time, similar to what might be experienced from a large wave or wake from 
a  passing  vessel.  The  experiment  demonstrated  the  inherent  dangers  of  improperly  stowed  gasoline  and 
portable heaters. From the time the fuel container and propane space heater were tipped on the test vessel 
it took just:  

 

33 seconds for large amounts of flame to develop. 

2 minutes 10 sec. for fire to spread from 

stem to stern. 

3 minutes 28 sec. for the the hull to fail 

(vessel would have started to sink). 

Flame spread in actual fire conditions will vary depending on a 
large  number  of  factors.  This  test  documents  that  improper 
stowage  of  flammable  liquids,  especially  near  open  heat 
sources,  is  exceptionally  dangerous.  This  type  of  fire  will 
quickly overwhelm crew members and must be prevented at all 

costs. 

 Portable fuel containers must be secured against shifting  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

