  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 14 1997 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

FISHING VESSEL LIFESAVING EQUIPMENT 

      Safety Alert 08-97 
 

The  purpose  of  this  safety  alert  is  to  remind  the  commercial  fishing  industry  of  the  requirements 
and importance of lifesaving equipment for commercial fishing industry vessels.  

Recently an uninspected 69-foot commercial fishing vessel, with three people on board, caught on 
fire and sank at approximately 40 miles offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. The vessel's crew tried to 
fight  the  fire  with  portable  extinguishers,  but  were  unsuccessful.  They  then  requested  assistance 
from  nearby  vessels,  donned  life  preservers,  and  tried  to  deploy  the  vessel's  emergency 
positioning  indicating  radio  beacon  (EPIRB)  and  inflatable  liferaft.  According  to  the  only  survivor, 
the EPIRB may have sunk after it was thrown overboard and the liferaft could not be inflated. The 
cause  of  these  equipment  failures  is  under  investigation  by  Coast  Guard  Marine  Safety  Unit 
Galveston.  

Based on the vessel's length, its operation, location and the number of people on board, Title 46 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 25 26-5 requires similar vessels to have on board a float-free, 
automatically activated Category 1 406 MHz EPIRB stowed in a manner so that it will float-free if 
the  vessel  sinks.  The  vessel  is  also  required  to  have  an  inflatable  liferaft  by  46  CFR  Table 
28.120(a).  Additionally,  Coast  Guard  requirements  for  scheduled  maintenance  and  inspection  of 
lifesaving equipment are listed in 46 CFR Table 98.140.  

The  Coast  Guard  is  striving  to  improve  the  commercial  fishing  industry's  safety  record.  Coast 
Guard  fishing  vessel  safety  examiners  are  available  to  assist  operators  in  understanding 
Commercial Fishing Industry Vessel regulations Operators are highly encouraged to contact their 
local  Marine  Safety  Offices  to  schedule  a  voluntary  dockside  examination  for  their  vessels. 
Voluntary  dockside  examinations  are  no  fault  and  non-adversarial.  They  can  help  prevent 
occurrence of similar tragic incidents.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

1 

