 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
June  20,  2012                                                                                Alert  02-12 
Washington, DC                                    

Assistant Commandant for Prevention Policy 

OVERLOADED LIFTING GEAR ON FISHING VESSELS 

Recently,  several  catastrophic  failures  of  masts,  booms, 
and  lift  cables  have  occurred  on  purse  seine  fishing 
vessels  that  have  resulted  in  loss  of  life  and  severe 
injuries.    Over  the  years  many  casualties  have  occurred 
onboard  all  types  of  fishing  vessels  attempting  to  haul  in 
catches  that  exceeded  the  capacity  of  their  winches, 
hoists,  and  associated  equipment.    These  types  of 
casualties are not unusual.   This alert serves to remind all 
purse  seine  fishing  vessel  owners/operators  and  other 
fishing segments to ensure safe use of the haul equipment 
particularly matching the size and the capacity of the nets 
to  the  rated  size  and  capacity  of  the  winch/haul/hoist 
equipment,  taking  into  account  safety  factors  for  various 
species,  and  other  concerns  such  as  the  variable  platform  that  a  rolling  fishing  vessel  and  variable 
catch presents. 

Owners  /  operators,  and  vessel  Insurers  must  ensure  that 
vessel  winch,  haul  and  hoist  systems  are  not  modified  by 
crew  members  to  increase  the  lifting  capacity  beyond  the 
rated design which in some cases can be done very easily. 
Such boosting of hydraulic systems must be prohibited and 
certain components should be protected with special seals.  
The machinery should be properly maintained and records 
kept  in  a  historical  log.    It  is  imperative  that  owners  / 
operators  ensure  every  load  bearing  structure  and  its 
associated  components  are  maintained 
in  original 
condition,  that  they  will  be  operated  as  designed  using  all 
for  anticipated  working 
appropriate  safety  margins 
conditions. All such equipment will experience fatigue over time and as result must be inspected and 
monitored  routinely.  Bearings,  limit  switches,  brakes,  safety  devices,  sheaves,  cables  and  other 
components, should be routinely inspected by certified organizations. 

 

For  owners  /  operators  of  purse  seine  and  other  fishing  vessels,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly 
recommends: 

•  Know the design limits of load bearing structures and winches, hoist, and haul components; 
•  Ensure they are not modified by crew members; properly maintained; and are inspected and 
tested  on  a  regular  basis.    Repair/replace  components  immediately  when  deficiencies  are 
discovered;  

•  Evaluate and revise operational procedures as needed. 

 

This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes and does not relieve any foreign or domestic 
requirement.  Please visit http://fishsafe.info for additional fishing safety information.   
Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  Http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:  Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

