 
           

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 
May 16, 2014 
Washington, DC                                            Don’t let  

 

 

 

   Alert 06-14 

UNPREPARED SAFTEY EQUIPMENT 

determine your fate! 

 

 
Recently  while  performing  several  Port  State  Control  examinations  Coast  Guard  Sector  Hampton 
Roads  inspectors  discovered  numerous  SABRE  Emergency  Escape  Breath  Devices  (EEBD)  / 
Emergency  Life  Support Apparatus  (ELSA)  in  an  unprepared  status.    The  “Quick  Fire”  functionality 
that  puts  the  EEBD  into  operation  when  the  bag  is  opened  up  and  hood  is  worn  was  not  in  its 
“Primed”  state.  Such  a  circumstance  can  have  fatal  consequences  when  time  is  of  the  essence  to 
escape a hazardous atmosphere. 
 
When  purchased  or  returned  from  servicing  this 
equipment will have a small removable label viewable 
through a window on the bag that states “QUICK-FIRE 
NOT  PRIMED ANTI-TAMPER  DEVICE AND  FITTING 
INSTRUCTIONS  INSIDE.”    The  unit  is  not  ready.  
Once  delivered  to  a  vessel  a  technician  or  competent 
ship’s  employee  should  have  opened  the  bottom  left 
corner  flap,  attached  the  “Quick  Fire”  cord  and 
removed  the  label.  The  device  will  operate  correctly 
and  begin  to  supply  air  to  the  hood  when  the  flap  is 
properly connected and later opened.  

 
With the concern that insufficient preparation of critical 
life  saving  equipment  could  contribute  to  unintended 
fatalities,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends 
that  owners  and  operators  of  vessels  using  this  or 
similar  devices  carefully 
their  own 
EEBDs/ELSAs ensuring they are ready for use. 
 
that  all  other  safety  and 
Routinely  confirm 
firefighting  equipment,  systems  and  components 
are  maintained  and  serviced  as  per  applicable 
requirements and ready for proper operation. 

inspect 

During  your  inspection  of  this  equipment  be  aware  of  the  information  presented  in  the  attachments 
regarding counterfeit EEBDs. This issue was reported as a USCG Safety Alert in 2008 and in 2011 
reported as a Marine Safety Forum Safety Flash.   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis.  For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
September 19, 2008                                                                                                                Alert 6-08 
Washington, DC  

 

COUNTERFEIT EMERGENCY ESCAPE BREATHING DEVICES (EEBDs) 

 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  has  recently  learned  that  counterfeit  Unitor  model  UNISCAPE  15H  EEBD 
Emergency Escape Breathing Devices (EEBDs) are being sold to ship operators and placed onboard 
commercial  vessels.    The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  encourages  that  all  vessel  owners  and 
operators  with  EEBDs  onboard  carefully  and  thoroughly  inspect  them  for  authenticity.  If  any  doubt 
exists as to the authenticity, they should immediately contact their emergency equipment vendors and 
/ or the manufacturer for verification or replacement. 
 
The  number  of  fake  units  sold  and  currently  onboard  vessels  is  unknown  and  could  be  substantial.  
The fake reproduction will not fit over an individual’s head and the automatic air release valve will not 
open. A crisis situation requiring the use of an EEBD will be severely compounded, potentially leading 
to death, should a crewmember inadvertently rely on a fake reproduction.   
 
Differentiating factors:   
 
An  authentic  Unitor  UNISCAPE  15H  is  contained  in  a  shiny  PVC  bag.  When  viewed  from  the  front 
with the instruction icons upside down, the zipper opens from left to right, and at the most left section 
of the zipper is a two centimeter gap covered by a clear tab that has a button closure.    
 
The fake reproduction is contained within a dull canvas-like material bag.  When viewed from the 
front with the instruction icons upside down, the zipper opens from right to left, and at the most left 
section  of  the  zipper  there  is  no  opening,  although  a  tab  made  of  what  appears  to  be  the  same 
material of the bag is present with a button closure.  This unit will not automatically activate. 
 

Note:  Authentic  Unitor  UNISCAPE  15H  EEBDs 
are  not  permitted  on  U.S.  flag  vessels  because 
they  are  not  National  Institute  for  Occupational 
Safety and Health certified.  
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational 
purposes only and does not relieve any domestic 
or  international  safety,  operational  or  material 
requirement.    Developed  and  distributed  by  the 
Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  United 
States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington, 
DC. 

 

******* 

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

 

 

 

 

Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 11-09 
Issued:  8th March 2011 
Subject: Fake EEBD-set – useless and dangerous 
 
The  purpose  of  this  notification  is  to  warn  potential  users  of  EEBD-sets.  (Emergency  Escape 
Breathing Device) against accidents and loss of life. 
 
WSS Safety service station in Stavanger, Norway received EEBD-sets for annual inspection from 
one of our regular customers.  The service engineer discovered that the bags and the EEBD-sets 
were  fake  copies  of  the  Unitor/MSA  type  Uniscape  15H  –  and  of  the  same  type  (copy)  as 
previously discovered and informed. 
 
IT IS OF UTMOST IMPORTANCE THAT THESE FAKE  SETS ARE  TAKEN  OUT OF SERVICE 
WHENEVER  DISCOVERED  –  AND  THE  OWNERS  ARE  SERIOUSLY  INFORMED.    THESE 
FAKE  COPIES  DO  NOT  WORK  AS  THEY  ARE  SUPPOSED  TO,  AND  WILL  CREATE  AN 
EXTREMELY DANGEROUS SITUATION FOR THE USER WHEN IT IS NEEDED FOR ESCAPE. 
 
• The mask hood is impossible to get over  your head.  This is the most serious identification; 
The neck tightening rubber membrane is not flexible enough to be able to pass a normal head size, 
and it is sewed to the hood with one single seam – not welded as an original Unitor hood. 
 
• The bag has similar print as the WSS original: “UNITOR UNISCAPE 15H” and “Safety by MSA” is 
printed on the frontside (together with 4 sketches of how to use. 
 
• The bag material is different; Unitor: shiny PVC. Fake: Dull canvas-like material. 
 
•  The  zipper  is  opened  from  right  to  left,  which means  that  we  evaluate  the  functionality  of  the 
automatic release mechanism to be doubtful. When the zipper is opened, it moves towards the 
cylinder valve – not away from it/pulling also the air release line. 
 
•  All  sets  that  are  discovered  per  now  has  a  company  label/service  tag,  with  the  following 
information: 
 
UNIscan Marine Products & Services 
Uniscan Middle East L.L.C. 
Shed No.: 71, Al Jadaf Dry Docking Yard 
P.O.Box 62487, Dubai, U.A.E. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Unitor EEBD copies in circulation 

 

 

 

 
Original Unitor EEBD: 
Zipper has 2 cm opening on the teeth 
Zipper closes from right to left 
Copied equipment: 
Zipper has no opening 
Zipper closes from left to right. Air-release 
cannot be activated automatically. 
Copy 
Original 
 
 

