                         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

March 21, 2013                                                                                                                             02-13 
Washington, DC 

BOW RIDING IN HEAVY WEATHER 

Don’t get bounced! 

Pulpit Area 

 
Several  passengers  standing  in  the  bow  pulpit  of  a 
106’  inspected  whale  watching  vessel  were  injured 
while  underway.    The  vessel  struck  a  large  wave,  its 
bow rose and slammed down causing the passengers 
in the pulpit to lose their balance and fall to the deck.  
Injuries ranged from cuts and bruises to a broken pa-
tella (knee) and jaw.  Although there were many other 
passengers on board at the time, only the passengers 
standing in the pulpit were injured. 
 
The investigation concluded that:  
 

•  Proper  verbal  briefings  regarding  unfavorable 
weather  conditions  were  made  to  the  passen-
gers; 
had 
disregarded these safety warnings.   

passengers 

however, 

some 

 

ea and pulpit should be vacated.   
 

•  The vessel did not have a policy which outlined operational conditions as to when the bow ar-

The master’s judgment is crucial in considering securing access to the bow area when the vessel is 
operating in less than ideal sea conditions.  As the sea state and speed of the vessel increases, the 
likelihood of the vessel experiencing sudden and erratic motion also increases.  These circumstances 
and passenger demographics should be considered when determining if the closure of the bow area 
is necessary.   
 
As a result of this casualty, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that all vessel owners/operators 
operating vessels with bow areas open to passengers establish written policy and procedures for va-
cating the area when operational conditions present risks of injury. The policy and procedures should 
address the vessel’s speed and sea state, in addition informing passengers during the pre-departure 
safety brief of the restrictions prior to getting underway. 
 
This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or in-
ternational  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  and  distributed  by 
the 
Investigations Office of Coast Guard Sector Southeastern New England and the Office of Investiga-
tions and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC. 
                                                                       

******* 

