  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 1997 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 04-97 
 

WOOD AND FIBERGLASS VESSELS MAKE POOR RADAR TARGETS 

SMALL VESSEL  OPERATORS  SHOULD  NOT ASSUME LARGE  VESSELS SEE THEM ON RADAR  OR 
KNOW WHAT THEY'RE ACTUALLY DOING. Courtesy of MSO Portland, ME.  

A 60' eastern rigged trawler and a 770' tanker collided in the Gulf of Maine on Sept. 5, 1996. The trawler 
suffered  heavy  damage  in  the  incident.  Only  the  evasive  action  taken  by  the  tanker  at  the  last  minute 
prevented the loss of the trawler and possibly the lives of the two fishermen involved. 

While  many  factors  contributed  to  this  collision,  Coast  Guard  investigators  believe  that  commercial 
fishermen, and boaters of all kinds, routinely overestimate the collision avoidance capabilities of large ships 
and  do  not  typically  recognize  what  they  need  to  do  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  being  involved  in  a 
collision. 

For example, in this case most of the 1000+ ships that transit the Gulf of Maine each year use advanced 
collision  avoidance  computer  systems  that  work  off  a  ships'  radar.  These  computers  can  automatically  or 
manually  acquire  and  track  radar  targets  and  will  sound  an  alarm  to  the  vessel's  deck  officer  if  a  risk  of 
collision is calculated. These systems are usually very accurate and are relied upon by mariners worldwide 
to avoid collisions at sea. Unfortunately, in order for these systems to operate effectively they must detect 
and track radar targets continuously over a period of time. Vessels that provide intermittent or weak (poor) 
radar  signatures  significantly  hinder  the  ability  of  the  computers  to  accurately  calculate  true  vessel 
movement.  This  can  lead  to  cases  where  a  vessel  being  tracked  by  the  computer  may  be  maneuvering 
quite differently than what is indicated by the computer data. Because of this small vessel operators should 
be wary that, just because a ship is large and apparently sophisticated, there is no guarantee that the ship 
is fully aware of your vessel's movements. 

All small boat operators can significantly reduce the risk of having a collision with other vessels by ensuring 
that  their  boat  provides  the  biggest,  strongest,  most  visible  and  continuous  radar  signatures  possible.  By 
improving  the  ability  of your  vessel  to  be  seen by  radar  you  significantly  increase  the  possibility  that  your 
vessel  will  be  clearly  detected  at  the  earliest  opportunity  and  that  any  collision  avoidance  computer  that 
tracks your vessel will do so as accurately as possible.  

Operators  of  small  vessels  are  cautioned  that  wood  and  fiberglass  are  particularly  poor  radar  reflecting 
materials and produce weak radar signatures. Vessels constructed of wood and fiberglass can significantly 
improve their radar signatures and increase their radar visibility by ensuring that flat metal surfaces or radar 
reflectors are provided on the vessel's exterior. These devices should be located in unobstructed areas on 
the  vessel  as  high  above  the  waterline  as  possible.  Radar  reflectors  are  also  required  equipment  for  all 
Federally  documented  commercial  fishing  vessels  of  non-metallic  construction  that  operate  outside  of  the 
Boundary  Line  or  with  more  than  16  individuals  onboard  as  per  46  Code  Of  Federal  Regulations  28.235 
unless the vessel is fitted with gear that provides a radar signature from a distance of 6 miles. 

Equally important in reducing the risk of collision is making sure your vessel complies with all navigational 
lighting requirements. Besides being required by law, navigation lights (often referred to as running lights) 
provide the best opportunity for mariners to visually verify or quickly assess the heading of another vessel. If 

1 

the  navigation  lights  are  incorrect  or,  in  some  cases,  missing  altogether,  a  deck  officer  cannot  easily 
determine  another  vessel's  heading.  Further,  the  use  of  bright  deck  lights  should  be  avoided.  While  the 
bright lights themselves might improve the chance of being seen by other vessels, the lights can obscure a 
vessel's'  navigation  lights.  Deck  watch  officers  might  also  confuse  the  use  of  bright  lights  with  active 
stationary fishing and will assume a vessel is not moving. Both of these situations can cause confusion and 
increase the possibility of collision.  

Small vessel operators are also reminded that one of the best collision avoidance tools at sea is the proper 
and early use of a VHF radio. Remember, when calling another vessel via VHF, clearly give a description of 
your  vessel,  its  position  and  movement  as  well  as  an  approximate  description,  position  and  movement  of 
the vessel you're calling. Additionally, when hailing a ship it is best to avoid the use of local terminology and 
slang because a ship's officer might be unfamiliar with a specific locality. The use of vague terms such as 
"calling the ship on my bow" should also be avoided because the range of a VHF radio can be significant 
and  calls  such  as  these  can  cause  a  great  deal  of  confusion,  especially  if  there  are  other  vessels  in  the 
vicinity.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

 

2 

