June 9, 2016 
Washington, DC                         

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 05-16 

 

Enjoying the Waterways in a Safe (and Legal) Manner 

This  safety  alert  seeks to  raise  awareness  regarding  federal  safety  requirements  for  vessels  carrying  any 
paying passengers onboard a vessel on navigable U.S. waters.  
 
Picture the following scenario: The sea bass are running and your friend has a friend who can take you and 
another person fishing for a reasonable fee.  He owns a boat that is ideal for fishing.  You have a great day 
on the water, catch plenty of fish, and begin to return at dusk.  While heading back in your Captain misreads 
the lights of another oncoming vessel and the boat you are on just barely escapes a high-speed, broadside 
collision.  Everyone is thrown around as your boat goes through the other boat’s wake and nearly capsizes.  
You  return  to  the  dock  with  everyone  onboard  shaken  by  the  experience  and  you  quickly  come  to  the 
realization that it was simply luck nobody was injured or killed. 
 
In  the  above  instance,  what  seemed  as  an  almost  benign  arrangement  was  in  fact  an  illegal  and  unsafe 
operation.  While sharing costs of a boat trip is perfectly legitimate and legal, in this hypothetical case, the 
Captain  was  required  to  be  credentialed  by  the  Coast  Guard.    As  a  result,  he  did  not  possess  the  basic 
safety knowledge to operate as a Captain of an Uninspected Passenger Vessel (UPV).  Additionally, he was 
not regularly tested for illegal drug use and his vessel may have lacked proper safety equipment necessary 
for passenger safety operations.  There are many other examples of non-compliant UPV operations, which 
have become all too common across the nation as new smartphone apps have made it easier to connect 
the general public with boat owners offering excursions.  Boat owners or operators that serve as masters of 
UPVs and carry paying passengers are required by law and regulation to meet federal requirements for that 
type of operation.  In accordance with Title 46 USC 4106, if a UPV is operated in violation of applicable laws 
and regulations, the owner, charterer, managing operator, agent, master, and individual in charge  may be 
liable for a $5,000 civil penalty per incident.  
 
This requirement is especially relevant for prospective passengers who book transportation services from a 
smartphone  app  and  common  examples  include:  water-taxis,  offshore  fishing,  sight-seeing,  water  sports, 
burial-at-sea  services,  whale  watching,  sunset/dinner  cruises,  diving  charters,  corporate/school  functions, 
movie shoots, and special events like Christmas boat parades, sailing regattas, and firework shows. 
 
What  makes  these  types  of  services  fall  under  federal  requirements  as  commercial  vessel  services  is 
whether  or  not  one  of  the  passengers  paid  a  fee  for  the  service  provided.    More  specifically,  whenever 
consideration is contributed as a condition of carriage on the vessel and that consideration (i.e., payment) 
directly or indirectly flows to the owner, operator, agent or any other person who has a fiscal interest in the 
vessel,  the  transaction  results  in  the  excursion  becoming  a  commercial  service.    There  are  exceptions 
related  to  bareboat  charters,  but  a  charter  agreement  would  have  to  be  in  place  and  the  charterer  would 
have to be given full control of the vessel including the choice of who would serve as the operator/master. 
 
The  many  safety  requirements  for  UPVs  relate  to  licensing,  watch  standing,  vessel  documentation, 
mandatory drug testing regime, casualty reporting, required charts and electronic equivalencies, navigation 
lights  and  sound  signals,  life  saving  and  firefighting  equipment,  safety  orientation  and  instruction,  and 
pollution prevention.  All of these different items build a “safety net” that goes well beyond the knowledge of 
an average boat operator and the basic safety equipment found on a typical recreational boat. 
  
The Coast Guard strongly urges  potential customers to be mindful of the dangers of using unauthorized 
boat  operators.    For  your  safety  and  the  safety  of  others,  please  ensure  that  your  boat  operators  are 
credentialed by the U.S. Coast Guard and are operating vessels with the required safety equipment aboard. 
 
This  safety  alert  was  developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.    Any  questions  or 
comments should be sent to: HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

