  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 3, 2014 
Washington, DC 
 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 12-14 

 

DESIGNED FOR A REASON – FUEL SYSTEM MODIFICATIONS LEAD TO FIRE 

 

including 

MALE-TO-MALE VARIABLE LENGTH COUPLING 

This safety alert serves to raise awareness regarding the importance of using proper replacement 
parts and equipment in accordance with their intended purpose.  Recently, a casualty occurred on 
a passenger vessel operating about a mile offshore in the Atlantic Ocean.  A crewmember, while 
making  a  round  in  a  machinery  space,  noticed  that  a  small  fuel  spray  fire  had  developed  above 
one of the four propulsion engines.  The crewmember vacated the space and informed the bridge 
watch.    Subsequently,  proper  emergency  procedures  were  followed,  ventilation  to  the  machinery 
space was secured, and the CO2 via the fixed fire fighting system was released.   Fortunately for 
the  174  persons  onboard,  the  fire  was  quickly  extinguished  without  incident  or  additional 
complications.    Although  the  investigation  is  not  complete,  important  causal  factors  were 
discovered and are shared here.  
 
The  vessel  was  equipped  with  four  Detroit 
Diesel  sixteen  cylinder  high  speed  engines  -
model 16V92.  The engines were constructed 
by  coupling 
two  V-8  cylinder  engines 
together.    There  are  also  other  similarly 
coupled  engine  models  and  in  widespread 
use 
the  Detroit  Diesel  12V92, 
12V71,  and  16V71.    Fuel  and  coolant  flow 
from  head-to-head  and  within  passages  on 
each  side  of  the  engine.    The  fuel  supply 
passage  delivers  fuel  to  the  injection  equipment  of  each  cylinder.    A  return  passage  handles 
excess fuel.  To connect the heads on each side of the engine, a male-to-male threaded variable 
length coupling is used by design.  There are four couplings per engine that handle fuel supply and 
returns  from  the  injection  components.    These  couplings  are  unique  in  that  they  facilitate 
installation by their capability to lengthen when their ends are threaded into the heads.  
 
On  the  passenger  vessel  that  experienced 
the  engine  room  fire,  couplings  on  three  of 
the four engines were replaced with threaded 
hose  barb  fittings  and  rubber  hose.    One  of 
those  fuel  hoses  subsequently  failed  and 
sprayed  fuel  directly  onto  the  main  engine 
exhaust  lagging  and  blankets.    The  seam  in 
the insulation blanket was facing towards the 
engine  rather  than  away  and  likely  provided 
the ignition source. 

 

1 

 RUPTURE As a result of this casualty the Coast Guard strongly encourages owners, operators, and marine 
engine rebuilders with the types of engines listed above, either as propulsion or prime movers for 
generators to: 
 

  Always use proper replacement parts, 
  Consider seam placement of exhaust insulation blankets and lagging during installation,  
  Follow  good  marine  practice  by  always  maintaining  the  tightness  and  correct  fit  of  the 

insulation blankets over the entire exhaust system, and  

  For those who repair or own and operate vessels with these Detroit Diesel engines either as 
propulsion or electrical generation equipment of design configuration 16V92 ,12V92, 12V71 
and 16V71, inspect and verify that the proper head to head couplings are used for the fuel 
supply and return passages.  If incorrect, contact an authorized manufacturer technician for 
specific guidance. 

The use of proper engine replacement parts is paramount to safety! 

LOOKING DOWN AT ENGINE 

COUPLINGS 

 

AREA NEAR COUPLINGS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international safety, operational, or material requirement.  Developed by the Sector Jacksonville 
Investigations Division in coordination with the Office of Investigations and Analysis, Washington 
DC.  For questions or concerns, please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.   
 
 
 

2 

 

 

 

LAGGING AND SEAM OF EXHAUST PIPING 

