         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

July 28, 2016 
Washington, DC 

 Safety Alert 08-16 

Be Prepared for Surprises if the Circumstance Arises! 

Avoid Accidental Hazmat Exposure 

 TWO MAN TEAM  
& SAFETY STRAP 

to 

related 

whether 

USE A 

 
This  safety  alert  serves 
to 
remind  Coast  Guard  Container 
Inspectors  and  others  involved 
in  the  inspection  or  handling  of 
intermodal  containers 
to  be 
aware  that  there  is  always  a 
risk  of  exposure  to  hazardous 
materials, 
the 
containers  are  marked  as 
containing HAZMAT or not.  
 
During a recent review of Coast 
container 
Guard 
inspector 
injuries, 
there  were  several 
to  acute 
instances 
exposures 
hazardous 
materials.   
 
In  all 
instances, 
exposed  inspection  personnel 
immediately  backed  away  from 
the container to a safe distance 
and  sought  medical  treatment 
and  professional  response  to 
the release.   
 
Indications  of  hazards  can  include  oxygen  deficient  environments,  hazardous  material  leaks, 
odors or sounds (such as when compressed gas is released), symptoms of dizziness or light-
headedness,  and  any  other  indication  of  hazardous  material  encounter,  such  as  a  dermal 
sensation.    It  is  critically  important  to  use  a  multi-gas  detector  to  improve  inspector  hazard 
detection capabilities and situational awareness. 
 
 
The causes for these reported exposures and hazardous situations varied but included: 

reported 

PLACE GAS METER AT SILL BEFORE OPENING DOOR 

 

 

1 

Safety Alert 08 -16 

 

•  Cargoes shifting in shipment and damaged packaging, blocking, and bracing; 
 
•  Poorly secured cylinders or unsecured lids on drums; 
 
•  Container vents taped shut from the inside and, as such, not visible to inspectors; and 
 
• 

Improper  loading  of  the  container  and  undeclared  hazardous  materials  off-gassing  due  to 
temperature and/or humidity changes. 

 
As a result of these incidents, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that port professionals, 
shippers, and industry personnel working with containerized cargo follow all best practices and 
meet all safety requirements during each stage of the transportation stream.   Safely package, 
stow,  and  handle  containers  and  cargo  and  immediately  address  any  situation  involving 
hazardous  materials  by  contacting  the  appropriate  private  or  public  emergency  response 
organizations. 
 
Never underestimate the importance of: 
 
•  Properly  loading  containers  and  using  proper  hazardous  material  communication  (e.g., 

placards and labels)  in accordance with domestic and international regulations; 

 
•  Following established safety procedures when conducting container inspections; and 
 
•  Knowing  hazardous  material  release  protocols,  including  evacuation  procedures  when 

hazards are identified or suspected. 
 

Note:  Coast  Guard  inspection  procedures  and  safety  protocols  can  be  found  in  Chapter  3  of 
the National Container Inspection Program (NCIP) Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTP) 
at http://www.uscg.mil/forcecom/ttp/pubs/CGTTP_3-72_3_NCIP.pdf. 
 
Coast  Guard  personnel  should  complete  a  mishap  report  in  accordance  with  the  Safety  and 
Environmental Health Manual and copy CG-FAC-2 on all container related mishaps.  
 
This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic 
or international safety, operational or material requirements and was developed by the Coast 
Guard  Office  of  Port  and  Facility  Compliance  (CG-FAC)  in  conjunction  with  the  Container 
Inspection  Training  Assist  Team  (CITAT).    For  questions  or  concerns,  please  contact  the 
Office of Port and Facility Compliance, Facility Safety Branch, at (202) 372-1114, or send an 
email to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-FAC-2@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

