 
 
 
 
 
July 2, 2008                                                                                                                 Alert 3-08 
Washington, DC   
 

Controllable Pitch Propeller Systems 

and  

Situational Awareness 

 
A marine casualty in March of 2008 involving a fishing vessel in the Bering Sea resulted in multiple 
fatalities and complete loss of the vessel.  A Marine Board of Investigation is currently examining the 
various  circumstances  surrounding  the  casualty.    Although  the  investigation  is  not  complete,  safety 
issues associated with casualty have been identified that merit immediate public dissemination.   
 
Based  on  the  survivors’  testimony,  the  crew  experienced  difficulty  with  launching  and  entering  the 
three liferafts because the vessel was making considerable sternway when the order to abandon ship 
was issued.  Evidence indicates the main engines were still running and the vessel was backing with 
significant astern pitch.  Consequently, two of the liferafts quickly traveled forward past the bow of the 
vessel  when  they  were  launched.    Attempts  to  retrieve  the  liferafts  using  the  painter  lines  were 
unsuccessful.  As a result, the majority of the crew members were forced to jump into the 34°F water 
and attempt to swim to the liferafts.  Ultimately, only 22 members of the vessel’s crew made it into the 
liferafts.  All of these crew members survived.  Of the other 25 crew members who never made it into 
a liferaft, four died and one remains missing. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners,  operators,  and  masters  of  vessels  with 
controllable  pitch  propellers  understand  the  design  and  operation  of  the  system.    This  includes  the 
primary  and  emergency  sources  of  power  for  both  the  control  and  main  systems,  the  location  and 
procedures for using alternate control stations, and the locations of the emergency shutdowns.  While 
controllable  pitch  propeller  systems  are  generally  designed  and  constructed  to  fail  in  the  “as  is” 
position, in hydraulic CPP systems, the actual blade pitch may change. In this case the vessel was 
making  considerable  sternway.  This  was  not  a  unique  occurrence.  The  MS  EXPLORER  also 
experienced  this  problem  before  it  sank  in  November  of  2007.  Vessel  operators,  masters  and  crew 
members must be prepared to respond accordingly.   
 
In light of this incident, vessel owners, operators, masters and crew members should also be mindful 
of the following safety issues:  
 
1.  Vessel masters and officers must maintain situational awareness at all times and understand the 
effects  of  their  actions  and  decisions  on  the  safety  of  their  crew,  especially  during  emergency 
situations involving flooding.  This includes understanding what impact the vessel's speed, heading, 
heel, and trim will have on the crew as it abandons ship.   
 
2.  The master or individual in charge must evaluate the particular circumstances of each emergency 
situation  (weather,  seas,  experience  of  crew,  condition  of  vessel,  etc.)  and  adjust  emergency 
procedures accordingly to provide for the safety of his crew, vessel, and the environment. 
 

Page 1 of 2 

3.  All crew members should understand that immersion suits will affect their dexterity, limit mobility, 
and may make it more difficult to launch survival craft, particularly when the survival craft are covered 
with snow or ice.  Crew members responsible for launching the survival craft should practice and be 
able  to  do  so  with  their  immersion  suits  on.    Lifesaving  gear  should  be  kept  free  of  ice  and  snow 
whenever possible. 
 
4.  When abandoning ship, crewmembers should make every effort to enter directly into a liferaft or 
lifeboat before entering the water.  If crewmembers must enter the water, they should stay together 
and  attempt  to  enter  a  liferaft,  climb  onto  floating  debris,  or  use  any  other  means  available  to  get 
themselves out of the water as soon as possible. 
 
5.  Emergency  Drills  should  not  be  limited  to  routine  procedures  such  as  donning  immersion  suits.  
Emergency  drills  should  ensure  all  crew  members,  including  bridge  and  engine  room  personnel, 
understand and practice what to do in various emergency situations under actual conditions.  
 
 
Additional  information  regarding  emergency  procedures  for  Commercial  Fishing  Vessels  can  be 
found at:   http://www.fishsafe.info . 
 
This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC. 
 

 
Office of Investigations and Analysis – http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe – Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 
 
 

******* 

Page 2 of 2 

