March 28, 2017                                                                                                  Lessons Learned 01-17 
Washington, DC                             

Lingering Lye Leads to Costly Deck Replacement 

 

 

from 

this  year  several  Coast  Guard  marine 
Earlier 
inspectors were performing a deficiency check on a 
crew  boat  that  operates  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.    It 
happened  to  be  raining  that  day  and  while  the 
inspectors  were  in  the  engine  room,  they  noted 
water  dripping 
the  overhead  at  various 
locations.  They  also  spotted  several  cracks  and 
parted  seams  in  the  aluminum  braces  of  the 
structure  that  was  the  underside  of  the  vessel’s 
cargo  deck.  The  extent  of  damage  and  exact 
sources of the leakage was difficult to determine, so 
the  inspectors  requested  the  boards  covering  the 
surface  of  the  cargo  deck  be  removed.  Upon 
returning  to  the  vessel  the  following  day,  the  team 
found  significant  wastage  covering  a  large  area  of 
the  now  exposed  aluminum  surface.  Furthermore, 
they identified areas where the corroded aluminum 
had  softened  and  appeared  spongy.  It  was  clear 
that a chemical reaction had taken place.  
 
In 
the  circumstances 
surrounding  this  situation,  the  inspectors  learned 
that there had been a caustic soda spill on the deck. 
While  it  was  washed  off  the  vessel  with  water,  a 
diluted caustic soda and water mix seeped into and 
settled  underneath  the  wood  planking.    A  chemical 
reaction  then  occurred,  causing  damage  and  the 
need for extensive repairs. 
 
Caustic  soda  is  highly  reactive  with  aluminum 
causing 
to  oxidize  and  corrode  quickly.  
Additionally,  when  caustic  soda  is  exposed  to 
aluminum  under  some  conditions 
it  can  also 
produce highly flammable hydrogen gas.   
 
As  a  result  of  this  incident,  the  Coast  Guard  reminds  vessel  owners  and  operators  to  consider  all 
hazards  related  to  chemical  spills.    In  addition  to  potential  health  risks  to  personal  involved  with 
routine handling and clean up of spills, there is also the potential for adverse chemical reactions with 
vessel components, construction materials, and other items onboard. 

Indications of Chemical Reaction and 

Destruction of Aluminum Plating 

investigation 

their 

into 

it 

This  document  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.  Developed  by  Marine  Safety  Unit  Lake 
Charles and distributed by Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  
Questions or comments may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

