 
           

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

July 9, 2014 
Washington, DC               IT’S THE SEEMINGLY MINOR ITEMS 

 

 

 

       LL 01-14 

that sometimes can create a catastrophe. 

not 

under 

visible 

throttle 

the  console 

  The  underside  of 

 
This is a reminder to owner operators that sometimes it is the most seemingly minor thing such as a 
mechanical part or electrical component that can lead to a catastrophe. For example, a nearly 20 year 
old bulker was leaving port when its main engine throttle failed.  In this case the vessel was able to 
drop anchor without incident. 
 
The failure occurred because a small drive belt 
that  connected 
lever 
components 
to  an  electrical  potentiometer 
failed.    Movement  of  the  throttle  causes  the 
potentiometer  to  move  and  creates  a  variable 
signal  to  other  controls  which  manage  engine 
speed. When the belt failed the control from the 
engine room console was lost.  Fortunately, the 
vessel  had  a  spare  belt  that  the  engineers 
replaced  quickly. 
the 
Bosch/Rexroth  throttle  was  encased  and  the 
belt  was 
normal 
circumstances.  Routine  inspection  of  the  belt 
did not occur.  
 
Other  examples: A  contact  in  a  small  electrical 
relay and part of the autopilot system stuck and 
caused a vessel to go hard to port at 24 knots; 
Three  of  four  nuts  on  a  propeller  shaft  seal 
loosened, went unnoticed and caused flooding of the machinery space of an Offshore Supply vessel; 
A  wire  chafed  and  grounded  out  cutting  power  to  critical  combustion  controls  while  a  vessel  was  at 
the dock, but not long after transiting a narrow Caribbean harbor entrance. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  recognizes  that  identifying  every  single  failure  mode  that  could  possibly  impact  a 
vessel’s  propulsion,  power  generation  system  or  steering  system  and  developing  a  comprehensive 
preventative  maintenance  system  for  such  systems,  equipment  and  components  is  a  very  complex 
task.    Nevertheless,  the  Coast  Guard  suggests  that  owner  operators,  marine  engineers  and  others 
particularly  onboard  or  associated  with  older  vessels,  think  about  and  identify  those  high  risk 
components which if a failure or malfunction occurs will result in a casualty. (Specifically components 
subject to gradual wear and tear or loosening.) Once identified responsible personnel should refer to 
their  respective  manuals  to  determine  proper  maintenance  requirements  and  take  the  necessary 
steps to prevent a future problem with the aim to reduce risk. 
 
This Lessons Learned is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic 
or international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis.  For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 
 

