  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 28, 2002 (estimate / reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 
 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 03-02 
 

HANDHELD STEERING SWITCHES 

Recently, while transiting inbound to the Tampa Bay Ship Channel, a tug and barge combination 
carrying  approximately  227,000  barrels  of  mixed  petroleum  products  lost  steerage  and  ran  hard 
aground.  The  incident  resulted  in  approximately  $225,000  dollars  of  property  damage  primarily 
associated with the barge's double bottom tanks.  

The  loss  of  steerage  was  caused  by  the  failure  of  a  hand-held  non-follow  up  remote  steering 
switch.  These  devices  are  routinely  used  throughout  the  towing  industry  and  consist  of  a  two-
button  switch  mounted  at  the  end  of  a  small  handle  attached  to  an  extendable  wire.  The  wire  is 
connected  to  the  vessel's  rudder  control  circuitry.  By  depressing  either  of  the  two  buttons,  the 
towing vessel operator is able to position the rudders and maintain desired steerage. This control 
is not the only steerage device available to the operator. However when used, it permits movement 
of  the  operator  within  the  pilothouse  area  enabling  him  or  her  to  ascertain  side  clearances  while 
transiting narrow channels or during other periods of close maneuvering. 

the micro switches thereby allowing the circuitry to return to normal. 

The  steering  switch  is  a  Robertson  Model  F  ½.  The 
assembly  contains  four  micro  switches  and  consists  of  two 
pushbuttons  which  when  depressed  come  in  contact  with  a 
two  sectioned  plate.  The  depressed  button  causes  one 
section of the plate to shift against the actuating tabs of two 
side-by-side micro switches. When this occurs, the steerage 
circuitry  is  activated  and  the  rudders  shift  in  the  selected 
direction. As the button is released, the inherent resilience of 
the contact plate causes it to move off the actuating tabs of 

During  the  casualty,  the  vessel  operator  was  unable  to 
change  to  another  means  of  steering  prior  to  the  tug  and 
tow  running  aground.  Afterwards,  an  inspection  of  the 
steering  switch  revealed  that  one  section  of  the  plate 
fractured  and  lodged  itself  between  the  other  section  and 
the  actuating  tabs  of  the  micro  switches.  Although  the 
buttons  were  released,  the  broken  section  of  the  plate 
depressed  the  actuating  tabs  resulting  in  the  continued 
hard right rudder positioning. The failure of the plate is most 
probably related to metal fatigue caused by long-term cyclic 
operation. 

Following the incident, the tug's owners inspected six other 

1 

vessels of its fleet. Four vessels were discovered to have similar fractures in various stages on the 
plate.  The  manufacturer's  equipment  manuals  were  void  of  any  preventative  maintenance 
requirements and the vessel's operators did not have any routine scheduled maintenance plan to 
inspect or replace worn components of the switch. 

Persons  owning  and  operating  vessels  with  Robertson  hand-held  steering  switches  and  other 
similarly operating equipment are strongly encouraged to: 

Inspect the internal components of existing controls for signs of fatigue or fracturing.  

• 
•  Establish  a  preventative  maintenance  procedure  that  complies  with  the  manufacturer's 

recommendations.  

•  Ensure that equipment operators are knowledgeable in its usage, capable of inspecting its 
components  and  completely  understand  what  immediate  actions  may  be  required  when 
failure occurs.  

•  Consider the use of an electrical disconnect switch located at or near the cable's connection 
to the vessel's primary steerage circuitry. The use of a disconnect switch will permit isolation 
of  the  cable  and  hand  held  unit  in  the  event  either  item  fails.  Disconnecting  would  enable 
operation of another steering method.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

