 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 22, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 11-16 

Dangerous Bycatch from Bygone Days 

 

Discarded Munitions Remain a Present-Day Hazard! 

that  exist 

Munitions found on sea floor. (CDC image) 

This  safety  alert  addresses  the  extreme 
hazards 
today  caused  by 
discarded  munitions  that  were  dumped  at 
sea long ago. They remain a significant risk 
to  commercial  fisherman,  those  operating 
dredges, and others who trawl and work the 
ocean floor.  In a recent event, a deckhand 
on a clamming vessel was severely burned 
when  a  canister  was  dredged  up  and 
brought  onboard  along  with  rocks,  clams, 
and  debris.  The  canister  likely  contained 
mustard gas or some other type of blistering 
agent.  
 
The  canister  itself  did  not  appear  to  be 
leaking  as  there  were  no  visible  odors, 
evidence  of  discharge,  or  sounds  of 
escaping contents.  After the rocks and the 
munitions canister were sorted out from the 
catch  and  discarded  a  crewmember 
discovered  he  had  been  exposed  to  some 
sort  of  hazardous  substance.    Several 
hours  later  he  developed  severe  blisters 
and  burns  over  multiple  parts  of  his  body.  
The  vessel  then  returned  to  port  where  he 
was  admitted  and 
local 
hospital.   
 
Mustard  gas 
is  a  chemical  weapon 
developed  during  World  War  I.    Millions  of 
pounds  of  this  product  and  many  other 
chemical  weapons,  bombs, 
torpedoes, 
artillery shells, and munitions were routinely disposed of at sea in U.S. coastal waters.  Many of these 
munitions  dump  areas  are  well  charted  with  warnings  posted  on  navigation  charts.    Nevertheless, 
there  are  numerous  other  areas  where  such  munitions  may  be  found  that  are  unmarked.    There  is 
also evidence to suggest that munitions were frequently “short dumped,” meaning dumped outside of 
the designated areas by contractors hired to take them to the intended locations. 
 

Approximate 12 lb. Mustard Gas Shell 
                       (CDC image) 

treated  at  a 

 

 

 

1 

Safety Alert 11-16 

 

The  Coast  Guard  previously  issued  a  safety  alert  (06-10,  June  2010  link)  on  this  same  topic  and 
continues to strongly recommend: 
 

•  Persons  involved  in  commercial  fishing  industries  review  their  navigational  charts  to  ensure 

that  the  areas  in  which  they  are  trawling  are  not  near  labeled  “Explosives  Dumping  Areas.”   
Such  areas  must  be  given  wide  berth  and  fishermen  should  recognize  that  bottom  surfaces 
change and objects can move from original disposal areas; 

•  Review  the  Maritime  Industry  3R  Explosive  Safety  Guide;  follow  and  understand  its 

recommendations; and 

•  Report  any  discovery  immediately  to  the  National  Response  Center  at  1-800-424-8802  for 

proper response.   (Alternatively, the USCG may be notified via channel 16.) 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirements.  Developed  by  the  Coast  Guard  Fishing 
Vessel Safety Division and Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  Questions or  comments 
may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
 
 

******* 

  

 

 

2 

