         

 
 
January 31, 2011 
Washington, DC 
 

 

 

 

   Alert 01-11 

INSPECTION OF FUEL OIL QUICK-CLOSING VALVES 

 
U.S. Coast Guard Port State Control Officers (PSCOs) are discovering Fuel Oil Quick-Closing Valves 
(QCVs)  intentionally  blocked,  modified,  and  poorly  maintained  preventing  them  from  operating  as 
designed during an emergency.   
 
QCVs are positive shutoff valves on fuel oil systems serving to isolate fuel tanks in the event of a fire 
and  also  prevent  “fueling”  of  a  fire  in  circumstances  where  system  piping  and  components  are 
compromised.    In  some  circumstances  they  could  be  the  only  means  of  securing  the  fuel  to  a 
flammable liquid fire. These valves are designed to be remotely operated.  Inoperable QCVs create a 
very serious hazardous condition putting the vessel and its crew at greater risk in the event of a fire.  
Blocking  or  disabling  these  valves  is  unacceptable  under  any  circumstance.  It  is  absolutely  critical 
that  they  operate  correctly,  are  maintained,  and  ready  for  use  at  all  times.  Proper  routine 
maintenance,  and  in  some  cases  approved  modifications  and  /  or  replacement  of  components  may 
be necessary to ensure reliability of the remote operator and closure of the valve. 
 
Owners  /operators,  vessel  engineers,  PSCOs,  Class  society  and  other  machinery  space  inspection 
personnel must fully understand the critical nature and importance of QCVs and associated systems.  
Crewmember  knowledge  of  testing,  operation,  maintenance  and  repair,  in  addition  to  related 
documentation  and  required  spare  parts  are  essential  elements  to  evaluate  during  an  inspection. 
International regulations  require that positive shutoff valves located outside the fuel tank be capable 
of being closed from a safe position from outside the space concerned.. 
 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  /operators,  vessel  engineers,  PSCOs, 
Class society and other machinery space inspection personnel ensure: 
 
a) The QCV operating system is capable of remotely closing all valves as designed; some systems 
close valves sequentially and others simultaneously. 
 
b)  There  is  a  maintenance  plan  in  place  including  technical  manuals  containing  diagrams  and 
information that describe the system components, required spare parts, operation, maintenance and 
repair. 
 
c) That all engine department personnel can identify the location of each valve, the respective remote 
closure and how to close them locally and remotely in an emergency.   
 
Note:  During  Coast  Guard  PSC  Exams,  vessel  engineers  should  be  able  to  explain  maintenance 
requirements of the system, and provide operational test and maintenance records. Engineers should 
be  able  to  describe  how  test  the  valves,  reset  them  after  closure,  and  understand  their  operational 
importance.  Vessels with inoperable QCVs may be subject to an operational control. 
 

 

1

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Foreign  and 
Offshore  Vessel  Compliance  Division  (CG-5432),  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters, 
Washington, DC. 
 
Examples of QCVs held in the open position: 
 

 
 
 
QCV blocked utilizing a bolt to hold in the open position. 
(Note: the painted portion on the bolt indicating possible 
long term condition.) 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
QCV blocked utilizing wire to hold closing weight up and the 
valve in the open position. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
QCV blocked utilizing a wooden block to hold the valve in 
the open position. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photos are courtesy of U.S. Coast Guard Sector New Orleans

 
 

 

 

******* 

 

2

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us     To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

