  
 
 
 
 
February 24, 2015 
Washington, DC 

SAFETY ALERT 

Coast Guard Alert 01-15 
BSEE Alert #315 

 

DYNAMIC POSITIONING SYSTEM FAILURES ON OFFSHORE SUPPLY VESSELS ENGAGED IN OIL 

AND GAS OPERATIONS IN THE U.S. OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF 

 
Discussion:  This  Joint  Safety  Alert  addresses  a  dynamic  positioning  (DP)  incident  involving  an  Offshore 
Supply Vessel (OSV) which resulted in a loss of position while conducting a critical Outer Continental Shelf 
(OCS)  activity.    The  OSV  was  attached  to  a  wellhead,  lost  position  and  severed  the  wellhead  tree  causing  a 
lubricant release on the platform deck and to the environment.  Immediately prior to the position loss, the OSV 
had multiple DP system alarms and failures, including loss of bow thruster and engine control.  No attempt was 
made to identify or correct the causes of these failures and the operations continued.  
 
At the time of the position loss, the OSV was being utilized to support pump and electric line equipment which 
was  connected  to  the  well  at  the  time  of  the  incident.  Specifically,  when  the  vessel  lost  position,  the  vessel 
operator was in the process of removing a downhole DX plug from the well via wireline.  High pressure pump 
lines  were  also  connected  to  the  well,  although  actual  pumping  operations  were  not  in  progress.  When  the 
vessel lost position, the Christmas tree was sheared from the well because of the force exerted on it by virtue of 
the  connected  high  pressure  lines.  Severe  consequences  were  averted  because  a  subsurface  safety  valve  was 
activated and there was an absence of hydrocarbon flow from the well.   
 
The  OCS  activity  performed  was  critical  due  to  the  short  time  to  terminate  and  the  potential  uncontrollable 
release of hydrocarbons from a well with known sustained casing pressure.  The Coast Guard and the BSEE are 
issuing this joint Safety Alert because we share jurisdiction on the OCS and wish to highlight the importance of 
an  OSV’s  Safety  Management  System  (SMS)  and  a  leaseholder’s  Safety  and  Environmental  Management 
System (see Reference 1). 
 
This incident highlights the following critical issues: 
 
Alarms: The Coast Guard and BSEE stress the importance of properly acknowledging and investigating all 
alarms, and taking immediate and positive corrective action prior to initiating or proceeding with any critical 
OCS activity.  
 
SMS: The OSV was not required to and did not have an International Safety Management (ISM) Code 
certificate.  The Coast Guard reminds OSV owners and operators that an effective SMS is essential to safe 
operations, particularly when those operations are critical OCS activities.  Had the OSV implemented an 
effective SMS, as described in the ISM code, it likely would have:  
 

1)  Had adequate emergency disconnect capability and procedures for loss of position events and personnel 
trained  in  those  procedures.  In  this  case  the  OSV  did  not  have  adequate  emergency  disconnect 
capability, procedures or training records;   

2)  Ceased the critical OCS activity after experiencing multiple DP system failures - including engine and 
thruster  loss  -  and  not  have  resumed  the  activity  until  after  correcting  the  causes  of  the  DP  system 
failures (see Reference 2). 

DYNAMIC POSITIONING SYSTEM FAILURES ON VESSELS OTHER THAN 

MOBILE OFFSHORE DRILLING UNITS (VESSELS) 

2 

 
Dynamic  Positioning:  The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  owners  and  operators  of  OSVs  using  DP  to 
follow DP guidance provided in reference 3 (Marine Technology Society (MTS) DP operations guidance) when 
conducting critical activities on the U.S. OCS.  See the applicable notice on this topic published in the Federal 
Register (77 FR 62247, October 12, 2012) for more details.  Had this OSV followed the MTS DP operations 
guidance it likely would have: 
 

1)  Had  a  DP  system  that  met  a  minimum  of  DP  Equipment  Class  2  (DP-2).  The  involved  OSV’s  DP 
system was DP Equipment Class 1 (DP-1), which means that a loss of position may occur in the event of 
a single failure. (see Reference 3, paragraph 4.1);   
 

2)  Had an Activity Specific Operating Guideline (ASOG) that prescribed emergency disconnect procedures 
and capability to prevent equipment damage and pollution.  The involved OSV did not have an ASOG 
defined.  The sample ASOG in MTS DP guidance recommend the operator should “halt operations and 
initiate contingency procedures” for thruster and generator failures, which this OSV experienced prior to 
the loss of position incident. (see Reference 3, Appendix C);   
 

3)  Had a Critical Activity Mode of Operation (CAMO) defined.  The involved OSV did not have a CAMO 
defined. The sample CAMO in MTS DP guidance recommend the operator change operating condition 
from “normal operations” to “informative/consultative status (risk assess)” when any change occurs to 
the  normal  operations  of  the  DP  system,  which  this  OSV  experienced  prior  to  the  loss  of  position 
incident. (see Reference 3, Appendix C);   
 

4)  Ensured  a  structured  competence  assurance  program  was  applied  to  all  key  DP  personnel.    At  a 
minimum DP personnel should be required to demonstrate proficiency in understanding the redundancy 
concept  and  emergency  procedures  to  respond in  the  event  of  a  DP  system  failure.    (see  Reference  3, 
paragraph 4.14). 

 
Leaseholder/operator SEMS:  BSEE strongly recommends leaseholders/operators consider Coast Guard 
recommendations for DP vessels when evaluating potential hazards and establishing/implementing contractor 
safe work practices in their SEMS program (see 30 CFR §§ 250.1911 and 250.1914).  BSEE reminds 
leaseholders/operators of their critical role in ensuring safety and environmental hazards associated with 
contracted vessels on their lease are properly managed.  For example, leaseholders/operators should ensure 
hazards associated with a loss of position by contracted DP vessels are analyzed and managed with appropriate 
contractor safe work practices.   
 
For additional information, contact Lieutenant Commander Elizabeth Massimi at (504) 671-2156 with the Coast 
Guard District 8 Prevention Division or Troy Trosclair at 504-736-2923 with the BSEE Gulf of Mexico Region. 
 
Reference 1: BSEE/USCG Memorandum of Agreement OCS-07 “Safety and Environmental Management Systems 
(SEMS) and Safety Management Systems (SMS)” (April 30, 2013).  
 
Reference 2: ISM Code Regulations 7 and 10 (2014 ed.).  
 
Reference 3: DP Operations Guidance, Part 2 Appendix 2:  DP Project /Construction Vessels (Dynamic Positioning 
Committee of the Marine Technology Society to aid in the safe and effective management of DP Operations (July 31, 
2012). 
 
Reference 4: Marine Technology Society Technical and Operations Guidance (TECHOP) “Defining Critical Activities 
Requiring Selection of Critical Activity Mode”, TECHOP_ODP_12_(O) (January 2014). 

