 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

September 1, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 12-16 

Good Data Input Equals Good Data Output 
Does your VDR work? Don’t wait to find out! 

This  safety  alert  reminds  vessel  owners  and  operators  to  periodically  validate  the  proper  operation  of  their 
vessel’s  Voyage  Data  Recorder  (VDR).    Annual  certifications  performed  by  equipment  technicians  in 
accordance with international Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) requirements may not be enough to ensure your 
best  interests  are  met.    Initial  system  testing  may  also  be  inadequate  to  detect  installation  and  operational 
deficiencies.    VDR  data  is  extremely  important  to  marine  investigators  during  accident  reconstruction.  
However, it can also be highly valuable to vessel owners and operators.  Following an accident, VDR data can 
assist  owners  and  operators  evaluate  the  performance  of  shipboard  personnel  and  vessel  equipment,  while 
also helping to determine causal factors related to an incident. This information can be essential for resolving 
damage claims arising from an accident.  Periodic reviews of VDR data can also help detect unsafe practices 
and equipment problems before a marine casualty occurs.    
 
Investigations into several recent groundings in the Pacific Northwest have revealed that the VDR equipment 
was not operating properly and not configured in accordance with SOLAS requirements.  In one instance, over 
sixteen  inputs  were  not  recorded,  likely  due  to  improper  initial  programming  of the  unit.    In  another  incident, 
personnel  had  difficulty  accessing the  information,  possibly  due  to  changes  in  a  computer  operating  system.  
Although  the  data  was  eventually  extracted,  critical  radar  information  was  not  captured.    Other  areas  of 
concern established by casualty investigations over the years point to insufficient deck officer knowledge about 
the operation of the VDR and most importantly the method to capture the data immediately after an incident.  If 
an owner or operator is uncertain about the functionality of a vessel’s VDR, now might be the time to validate 
its performance. 
 
Because  of  these  recent  incidents  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and  operators  of 
vessels equipped with VDRs take the following actions: 
 

•  Ensure  Deck  Officers  understand  VDR  operation  and  know  how  to  initiate  the  “Save  Data”  function 

immediately after an incident; 

•  Employ  a  qualified  service  engineer  to  perform  line-by-line  functionality  validation  of  all  the  required 
inputs, their storage, data coverage timeframe, and ability of this data to be properly played back with 
the  appropriate  equipment,  operating  systems  and  software  available.    The  line-by-line  validation  of 
VDR  inputs,  data  storage  and  quality  of  data  may  be  achieved  through  a  download  of  the  data, 
analysis, and playback on appropriate equipment.  The service provider should also check and inspect 
all  batteries,  enclosures,  location  aid  devices,  and  power  supplies  with  their  associated  alarms  in 
accordance with manufacturer instructions.   

Implement  a  company  policy  to  periodically  test  the  VDR  (in  additional  to  the  required  annual 
certification) to ensure complete operation of the system; and 

Incorporate the above recommendations in the vessel’s Safety Management System and maintenance 
record keeping systems. 

 
This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety, operational or material requirements.  Developed by Marine Safety Unit Portland, Oregon Investigations 
Division and the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  Questions or comments may be sent to HQS-
PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

• 

• 

 

 

 

******* 

