  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 15, 1999(reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

FLAMELESS RATION HEATERS 

 

      Safety Alert 01-01 
 

Situation:  Flameless  Ration  Heaters  (FRH)  stowed  onboard  several  Military  Sealift  Command 
(MSC) vessels have been identified as the source of elevated hydrogen gas (H2) concentrations in 
containers and cargo hold spaces. In most instances H2 gas elevations are barely detectable but 
in isolated cases the levels inside closed containers have entered the explosive range. One such 
container recently broke into flames on the pier after being opened and prepared for unloading.  

Background:  Subject  units  are  water  activated  devices  for  warming  military  Meals,  Ready-to  Eat 
(MRE).  FRHs  contain  magnesium-iron  alloy  (Mg-Fe)  and  other  powdered  ingredients  in  flat  High 
Density  Polyethylene  (HDPE)  pouch.  The  exothermic  chemical  reaction  which  warms  the  meals, 
produces hydrogen gas as a by-product. The addition of water is ordinarily required to cause the 
reaction  to  proceed.  However,  atmospheric  moisture  may  be  capable  of  penetrating  the  HDPE, 
causing  a  low  grade  reaction  and  the  evolution  of  H2  gas.  The  production  of  a  flammable 
atmosphere is very slow but H2 concentrations may occur inside containers and in upper reaches 
of holds where pockets of gas may be held.  

FRH  units  are  usually  packed  together  with  the  MREs,  inside  the  individual  menu  bags.  On  one 
ship,  all  FRHs  were  removed  from  the  MREs  and  stowed  in  refrigerated  containers  on  the  open 
deck.  While  this  method  of  stowage  removed  the  H2  gas  generating  problem  from  the  holds,  it 
concentrated  the  production  of  gas  within  the  on-deck  containers  and  resulted  in  concentration 
levels  in  the  flammable  range.  MSC  and  the  U.S.  Army  are  investigating  impermeable  foil  over-
wrapping methods and the use of non-hydrogen generating heaters but these solutions will not be 
fully implemented in the immediate future. 

Recommendation:  Ports  loading  or  receiving  shipments  of  MREs  and  FRHs  should  consider 
requiring the monitoring of containers and holds in which FRH are stowed prior to movement of the 
containers  or  any  activities  which  could  introduce  an  ignition  source.  COTPs  should  advise  ship 
operators  that  have  FRHs  aboard  their  vessels  of  this  potential  condition  and,  recommend  the 
operators have procedures and equipment necessary to monitor the temperature and atmospheric 
contents of containers holding FRHs. POC for additional information on FRHs is the Coast Guard 
Liaison  to  MSC,  CDR  Paul  Gugg  at  (202)  685-5726.  CDR.Gugg@msc.navy.mil  Operational 
insights  may  also  be  obtained  from  MSO  Guam  which  has  been  involved  in  the  discovery  and 
abatement of this problem on preposition vessels staged in its AOR. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

1 

