 
           

 
 
April 28, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

   Alert 04-14 

INADEQUATE SNAPHOOKS ON LIFEJACKETS  

REVERE MODELS 198RT & 160RT 

 

 
The  information  in  this  safety  alert  was  distributed  a  few  years  ago  by  Coast  Guard  Sector  New 
Orleans  with  limited  geographic  reach.    Recently,  Washington  State  Ferry  personnel  discovered 
numerous  problematic  snaphooks  on  one  of  their  vessels  and  reported  it  to  Coast  Guard  Sector 
Puget  Sound.    This  alert  gives  the  issue  wider  circulation,  and  provides  contact  information  for 
persons to take corrective action and obtain new snaphooks. 
 

 
The  issue  is  the  spring-loaded  tab  in  the  snaphook  on  the  waist 
belt  affecting  some  REVERE  lifejacket  models  198  RT  and  160 
RT. The tab has been found to be too long for both the thick or thin 
design,.    When  the  D-ring  of  the  main  waist  belt  is  “hooked,”  the 
length  of  the  tab  prevents  it  from  snapping  closed.  With  the  hook 
remaining  open,  the  D-ring  is  not  fully  secured.  (top  photograph) 
The  spring-loaded  tab  may  also  lose  its  resiliency.    (bottom 

photograph) 

 
The  Coast  Guard  recommends  that  owners/operators  that  have 
Revere model 198 RT or 160 RT lifejackets or vests on board their 
vessels inspect them closely for this potential defect.  
 
Persons  who  discover  problematic  snaphooks  should  either  call 
904-562-5900,  or  email  jacksonville.sales@survitecgroup.com  for 
specific directions on how to obtain replacement snaphooks.   
 
Owners/operators  are  requested  to  contact  the  Coast  Guard  at 
typeapproval@uscg.mil 
to  be 
widespread  within  their  organization(s).    Special  thanks  to  the 
Sector Puget Sound Investigations Division and to the Washington 
State Ferry system for sharing this information. 

is  discovered 

issue 

this 

if 

 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis.  For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

 
 

