 

 

 

 

 
August 15, 2018  
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    Safety Alert 13-18 

Let us enlighten you about LED lighting! 

Potential interference of VHF-FM Radio and AIS Reception. 

The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  has  received  reports  from  crews,  ship  owners,  inspectors  and  other 
mariners regarding poor reception on VHF frequencies used for radiotelephone, digital selective 
calling (DSC) and automatic identification systems (AIS) when in the vicinity of light emitting diode 
(LED)  lighting  on-board  ships  (e.g.,  navigation  lights,  searchlights  and  floodlights,  interior  and 
exterior lights, adornment).   

Radio  frequency  interference  caused  by  these  LED 
lamps were found to create potential safety hazards. 
For example, the maritime rescue coordination center 
in one port was unable to contact a ship involved in a 
traffic separation scheme incident by VHF radio.  That 
ship also experienced very poor AIS reception.  Other 
ships in different ports have experienced degradation 
of the VHF receivers, including AIS, caused by their 
LED  navigation  lights.    LED  lighting  installed  near 
VHF  antennas  has  also  shown  to  compound  the 
reception.  

Strong radio interference from LED sources may not 
be  immediately  evident  to  maritime  radio  users. 
Nonetheless,  it  may  be  possible  to  test  for  the 
presence of LED interference by using the following 
procedures: 

1.  Turn off LED light(s).  
2.  Tune the VHF radio to a quiet channel 

(e.g. Ch. 13). 

3.  Adjust the VHF radio’s squelch control 

until the radio outputs audio noise.  

above the noise threshold.  

4.  Re-adjust the VHF radio’s squelch control until the audio noise is quiet, only slightly 

 

 
 

 

Safety Alert 13-18 
 

5.  Turn on the LED light(s).  

 

• 

If the radio now outputs audio noise, then the LED lights have raised the 
noise floor. (Noise floor is generally the amount of interfering signals / static 
received beyond the specific signal or channel being monitored.) 
 

6. 

If the radio does not output audio noise, then the LED lights have not raised the noise 
floor. 

 
If the noise floor is found to have been raised, then it is likely that both shipboard VHF marine radio 
and AIS reception are being degraded by LED lighting. 

In  order  to  determine  the  full  impact  of  this  interference,  the  Coast  Guard  requests  those 
experiencing this problem to report their experiences to Coast Guard Navigation Center1. Select 
“Maritime Telecommunications” on the subject drop down list, then briefly describe the make and 
model of LED lighting and radios effected, distance from lighting to antennas and radios effected, 
and any other information that may help understand the scope of the problem. 

This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard, 
Spectrum  Management  and  Telecommunications  Policy  Division.  Distributed  by  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Analysis. Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CGF-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

                                                            
1 https://www.navcen.uscg.gov/?pageName=contactUs 

