  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 8, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

SEA KAYAK SAFETY ADVISORY 

      Safety Alert 07-96 
 

In  May  of  1995,  a  group  of  sea  kayakers  paddling  near  Harpswell,  Maine  unexpectedly 
encountered  strong  currents  that  resulted  in  three  kayakers  being  separated  from  the  group  and 
set out to sea. While their friends were set offshore, the main group was able to land their kayaks 
on a small island. Because a member of the group now ashore carried a signal mirror, the group 
was able to attract the attention of persons on the mainland, who in turn notified the Coast Guard. 
Based  upon  information  from  persons  ashore,  a  n  intensive  5  hour  effort  was  launched  that 
eventually  located  and  recovered  the  missing  kayakers.  This  incident  underscores  the  need  for 
proper  planning  and  signaling  equipment,  and  revealed  some  of  the  inherent  difficulties  in 
mounting open water searches for objects as small as sea kayaks.  
 
Based upon this incident and the tremendous growth in popularity of sea kayaking along the Maine 
coast, the U.S. Coast Guard reminds all sea kayakers to carefully consider and adopt the following 
procedures to increase their safety: 
 
Voyage  planning:  When  planning  a  voyage,  no  matter  how  short  or  simple  you  intend  it  to  be, 
take  a  few  minutes  to  leave  a  float  plan,  including  departure/arrival  times, number of people and 
color of kayaks with a responsible friend. If it's a spur of the moment trip, write a plan just before 
you go and leave it in an envelope marked "FLOAT PLAN" on the dashboard of your vehicle. Make 
sure to always monitor the weather before and during your trip.  
 
Know  your  limitations:  You  alone  are  the  best  judge  of  your  own  physical  limitations,  the 
capabilities  of  your  kayak,  and  most  importantly,  your  ability  to  operate  your  craft  and  gear. 
Respect the indiscriminate power  of the sea along the exposed Maine coast, and carefully avoid 
operating in restricted visibility, including fog, rain, and darkness.  
 
Choose  your  gear  carefully:  Make  sure  your  kayak  and  paddling  gear  is  in  good  condition. 
Properly  dress  for  the  prevailing  conditions  and  include  extra  clothing  and  provisions  to  allow  for 
changes  in  weather,  no  matter  how  nice  the  day  appears.  Make  sure  you've  prepared  for 
emergency  situations  by  including  safety  equipment  such  as  pumps,  sponges,  a  survival  knife, 
paddle float, and most importantly, a high quality, high visibility personal flotation device. 
  
Signaling  capability:  Sea  kayaks  are  exceptionally  difficult  to  see  from  a  distance,  especially  in 
marginal  conditions.  Compensate  for  this  fact  by  choosing  brightly  colored  sea  kayaks  a  n  d 
clothing, use retroreflective tape and carry advanced signaling equipment. In a sea kayak you ' re 
disadvantaged by size. Buy the most advanced signaling equipment available. At least one kayak 
in  a  group  should  carry  an  electronic  communications  device,  preferably  a  VHF  marine  radio  or 
cellular phone. All kayaks should carry a whistle or air horn, signal mirror, and strobe light.  
 

1 

Commercial vessel traffic: Stay well away from commercial vessels, and avoid crossing channels 
and thoroughfares, especially in restricted visibility. Large vessels often cannot deviate from their 
course  and  fishing  vessels  should  be  expected  to  operate  on  highly  erratic  courses  as  they  tend 
gear. Advanced grade flares such as this hand flare can greatly increase detection.  

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

 

2 

