March 11, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 4-15 
 

 

ENGINE ROOM OPERATIONS 

Maintaining Machinery, Knowing Escape Routes, & Conducting Thorough Engineering Watches  

 
Recently an engine room fire occurred onboard an older cruise ship while it was at berth.  A fuel oil 
spray under pressure developed from an operating engine’s fuel supply line when a bolted flange 
parted.    The  fuel  spray  ignited  when  it  contacted  the  engine’s  exhaust  piping  or  turbocharger 
components.    The  vessel’s  fine  mist  extinguishing  system  automatically  activated  and  performed 
as  designed  extinguishing  the  primary  fire.    Fuel  pumps  and  shutoff  valves  were  also  secured. 
However, the short-duration fire also ignited cable bundles, quickly filling the machinery space with 
smoke.  As a result, one crewmember and two technicians were unable to egress and perished in 
the engine room.   
 
Although  the  investigation  is  not  complete  and  there  is  more  to  be  learned,  the  Coast  Guard  is 
issuing this safety alert to: 1) reiterate the importance of vessel engineers being cognizant of and 
taking  action  on  engine  manufacturer  technical  bulletins  and  service  letters,  2)  remind  personnel 
working in machinery spaces to have a personal exit plan no matter where they are working, and 
3)  stress  the  value  of  having  engineers  frequently  perform  detailed  engineering  space  inspection 
rounds on engines, systems, and other equipment.  
 
The  ongoing  investigation  into  the  fire  has  revealed  that  a  fuel  line  supply  flange  integral  to  the 
engine parted after three bolts completely loosened and the remaining bolt fractured.  Other bolts 
within  the  engine’s  hot  box  were  also  found  broken.  The  involved  engine  was  a  Wartsila  model 
VASA12V32LNE  also  referenced  as  a  VASA  32.    It  is  a  very  common  engine  with  thousands 
operating  in  ship  and  shore  side  service.    Over  its  service  life  the  manufacturer  has  produced  a 
number of technical bulletins and service letters related to the fuel system piping, shielding of hot 
surfaces,  other  fire  protection  devices,  and  availability  of  components  to  meet  SOLAS 
requirements.  In its service letters Wartsila notes that fuel pipes leading to and from the injection 
pumps  are  subject  to  pressure  pulses  derived  from  the  injection  pumps,  vibrations  caused  by 
normal  engine  vibrations,  and  static  stresses  caused  by  heat  expansion.    Any  repairs  or 
modifications  to  the  fuel  system  must  follow  manufacturer  guidance  provided  in  associated 
manuals,  bulletins,  and  service  letters.    Owners  and  operators  may  obtain  engine  bulletins  and 
service 
letters 
/  engine 
manufacturers. 
 
In  this  case,  the  loosening  of  these  bolts  may  have  been  caused  by  vibrational  loosening.    It  is 
unknown  when  the  involved  piping  was  last  removed  and  reinstalled  and  whether  or  not  proper 
torque was applied to the bolts. 
 
Emergency egress was also identified as an issue during the fire investigation.  Machinery spaces 
onboard cruise ships and other large vessels are complex spaces where an unfamiliar person can 
become  quite  disoriented,  particularly  during  emergencies.    Additional  factors  like  the  loss  of  all 

their  Wartsila  service  representative  and  other  OEM 

through 

1 

Safety Alert 4-15 

 

power and lighting or excessive smoke can make rapid evacuation extremely difficult.  There are 
simple  steps  to  improve  the  odds  of  a  successful  escape.    Before  any  work  begins,  learn  the 
locations  of  available  exits  and  escape  routes  in  all  directions  (i.e.  up  and  down  levels  and 
platforms,  port  and  starboard).    If  there  are  watertight  doors  present  review  the  procedures  to 
manually  open  them  if  they  should  be  closed.    Also  learn  the  location  of  Emergency  Escape 
Breathing  Devices  (EEBDs)  and  review  their  proper  usage  and  activation.    Lastly  and  very 
importantly, always carry a good flashlight in your pocket.  The light it provides may save your life. 
 
An Oil Companies International Marine Forum (OCIMF) information document related to machinery 
space inspections and rounds states, “The widespread introduction of machinery automation and 
associated alarm and control systems has significantly changed the nature of operational practices 
on  board  vessels.    The  extensive  use  of  computers,  monitoring  tools,  and  equipment  has 
increased  the  volume  and  accuracy  of  data  to  the  extent  that  there  is  a  risk  that  the  responsible 
officer  may  become  insulated  from  the  actual  machinery  status  and  performance.”  The  full 
document  is  available  on  OCIMF’s  website:  http://tinyurl.com/OCIMF-PDF.  This  reference  is  for 
informational purpose only and is not an endorsement. 
 
The  purpose  of  engineering  personnel  conducting  rounds  in  machinery  spaces  is  to  identify  and 
initiate  intervention,  preventative  maintenance,  and  repair  actions  when  unsafe  conditions  exist.  
Carefully  accomplished,  engineers  will  discover  abnormalities  as  they  occur,  enabling  them  to 
minimize negative compounding events.  Identifying discrepancies such as loosening bolts, leaking 
piping  and  flanges,  excessive  oil  loss  through  poor  seals  and  gaskets,  failing  pump  seals, 
loosening  of  pipe  brackets,  inadequate  lubricant  levels,  etc.,  are  typical  issues  found  when 
thorough inspection rounds are conducted.  Each operating engine should be thoroughly examined 
several  times  a  watch  on  all  sides  available  noting  potential  leakages,  loosening  of  components, 
proper  drainage  of  air  coolers,  etc.  All  persons  making  rounds  should  be  using  very  bright 
flashlights in the performance of their inspection duties. 
 
As a result of this casualty, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that owner and operators of 
all types of vessels develop policy and procedures to ensure: 
 

•  They  have  up  to  date  service  bulletins  and  service  letters  for  critical  equipment, 
implementing  the  requirements  specifically  when  such  items  relate  to  fire  prevention  and 
safety; 

•  That service vendors, technicians, crewmembers, or any persons working within machinery 
spaces  understand  their  escape  routes  and  available  emergency  equipment  before  they 
start work and; 
 

•  That  all  engineering  personnel  know  how  to  perform  effective  and  comprehensive 
inspections  and  rounds  to  detect  abnormalities  and  problematic  systems,  equipment,  and 
components as early as possible. 

 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Sector  San  Juan 
Prevention Division and the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis, Washington DC.  For 
questions or concerns, please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.        

2 

 

 

