 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2010 
Washington, DC  

EXPLOSIVES SAFETY GUIDE 

RECOGNIZE,  RETREAT, REPORT 

                           Alert 06-10 

Just  days  ago,  a  145  foot  commercial  fishing  vessel  operating  in  the  vicinity  of  Hudson  Canyon, 
located  South  of  Long  Island,  New  York  dredged  up  10  old  (circa  1914)  munitions  canisters  that 
contained  mustard  gas.    One  of  the  canisters  broke  open  while  it  was  being  brought  onboard  the 
vessel  and  four  crewmembers  were  exposed  to  the  gas.  They  experienced  chemical  burns  and 
respiratory  problems.  As  a  result  of  the  exposure  the  boat  was  required  to  be  decontaminated  and 
therefore unable to fish for several days.  Furthermore, its catch was seized. 

Mustard Gas, also known as Sulfur Mustard, is a chemical weapon developed and used during World 
War I.  It was delivered in liquid or gas form and caused blistering of the skin, eye irritation possibly 
leading to blindness, and severe lung injury if inhaled.  

The  incidental  discovery  of  munitions  at  sea  during  fishing,  scuba  diving  and  other  evolutions  has 
been an occasional problem for decades.   Any such discoveries, handling of and or landing of any 
unknown  weaponry  or  components  onboard  vessels  can  have  catastrophic  results.    To  additionally 
complicate  the  situation,  these  items  can  be  well  encrusted  with  marine  growth  and  barely 
recognizable.  Thus,  the  discovery  of  any  unknown  /  unidentifiable  objects  must  be  treated  with 
extreme care and caution. 

The  U.S.  Army  Technical  Center  for  Explosive  Safety  provides  a  Maritime  Industry  3Rs  Explosives 
Safety  Guide  at  the  following  URL.    http://aec.army.mil/usaec/cleanup/images/mmrp-maritime.pdf  It 
emphasizes  Recognizing,  Retreating  and  Reporting  when  munitions  (unexploded  ordnance)  are 
found and provides useful imagery to assist in identifying these objects.   

In light of this recent event, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that  

•  any  persons  involved  in  commercial  fishing  industries  and  any  similar  activities,  review  and 
update  navigational  charts  to  ensure  “Explosives  Dumping  Areas”  are  well  marked  and 
identified and that all vessel operators know to give these areas wide berth when towing gear,  

review 3R material from the URL above, and  

• 

• 

report  any  discovery  immediately  to  the  National  Response  Center  at  1-800-424-8802  for 
proper response.   (Alternatively, the CG may be notified via channel 16.)    

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Please visit  http://fishsafe.info for additional 
fishing  safety  information.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis  and  Commercial 
Fishing  Vessel  Division,  U.  S.  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  D.C..  Questions  may  be 
addressed to the sender. 

Office of Investigations and Analysis: http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

**** 

