Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 16  
 

WHIPPING OF CABLE (STORED ENERGY) RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While changing out the wire on the crane winch shown in the photo, the Injured Person (IP) was positioned 
next to the winch so as to facilitate the securing of the cable on the drum.  One clamp had been placed on 
the cable when it was discovered that the cable needed to be adjusted.  The clamp was then slackened to 
allow for this adjustment.  Due to the non-rotating characteristics, composition, and bend of the crane wire, 
there was a great deal of mechanical energy stored in the wire at the securing location.  This stored energy 
caused the wire to spring back when the adjustment was made.  The IP was positioned in direct line of the 
wire movement resulting in the end of the wire hitting him in the forehead, just above his eye.  Even though 
the IP was wearing PPE at the time, the incident resulted in a small cut just above his eye, which had to be 
treated at the local emergency room. 
 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 

 

 

•  The task was being carried out by a Junior AB and although Senior ABs were supervising him, they did 

not have direct line of sight of the task. 

•  A Job Hazard Analysis (JHA) was not completed for the specific job of replacing the crane wire, and the 
hazard  of the  potential for stored mechanical energy  was not identified or considered prior to the task.  
Therefore, no control mechanism was put in place. 

•  The IP was positioned in “the line of fire.” 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  The company developed a documented procedure for this specific task. 
•  All employees attended a training session on the use and completion of the company Permit-To-Work 

(PTW) and JHA system. 

•  All company supervisors were instructed to ensure that jobs do not proceed unless they have been 

properly assessed for risk, and a valid JHA for the specific task is in place. 

 
Credit to: Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 13-21 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2013 

