www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Small leak leads to catastrophic failure

July 2019

This issue sponsored by

The June 2019 Beacon described an incident in which operators discovered a 

small leak in an 8-inch (200 mm) pipe containing flammable hydrocarbon gas. While 
the pipe was being isolated and depressurized, it suddenly failed catastrophically 
(Figure 1) releasing flammable gas. Fortunately, there were no injuries.

1

In another incident, in a refinery in the United States, operators observed a leak in 

a pipe exiting the Crude Unit Atmospheric Column. The pipe contained high 
temperature light gas oil (Figures 2, 3). During the response to the leak, the pipe 
catastrophically failed releasing a large quantity of hot gas oil (Figure 4). The 
resulting fire (Figure 5) injured 6 people, put others at risk, and caused significant 
damage to the refinery. Thousands of people in the surrounding community sought 
medical attention. Important parts of the refinery were shut down for many months.

Did You Know?

When you observe a small leak in a pipe or vessel, it is 

possible that the leak is from a small crack or pinhole in the 
pipe or vessel wall. The pipe or vessel wall may look like 
this:

2

4

3

5

It is also possible that the small leak is the first complete 

penetration of a pipe or vessel wall which has been 
significantly thinned by corrosion or erosion. It might look 
like this:

If a large area of the wall is thinned it may be ready to fail 
catastrophically, releasing a large amount of the pipe or 
vessel contents. Your efforts to respond to the leak may 
disturb the pipe or vessel, making failure more likely. 
Significant changes to the process conditions inside (pressure, 
temperature, flow rate) may also increase the likelihood of 
failure.

What Can You Do?

 If you find a small leak any process equipment, first, 

report the leak. Consider the possibility of a 
catastrophic failure, and make sure that the response 
plan will protect people, property, and the 
environment if this happens.

 Understand the potential consequences of a 

catastrophic failure based on your knowledge of the 
properties of the material in the leaking pipe or vessel 
(flammability, toxicity, corrosiveness, etc.) and the 
process conditions (temperature, pressure, flow rate, 
quantity of material, etc.).

 Consult your plant technical experts on the process 

and materials, corrosion hazards, materials of 
construction, and emergency response to help 
determine how to safely respond to the small leak.

 Read the April 2011 Beacon about small leaks 

becoming large leaks for more information.

References:

1. Morey, A. “Corrosion Under Insulation Revisited: Aren’t We About to Finish that Project?” Process Safety Progress 37 (4), pp. 502-505, December 2018.

2. US Chemical Safety Board report, https://www.csb.gov/chevron-refinery-fire/

What if that small leak turns into a big leak?

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, 

Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

