http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

This issue sponsored by

April 2011

(cid:197) Don’t let a small leak…

The pictures show how rapidly a small water 

leak at a construction site became a large and 
catastrophic leak. The pictures were taken just a 
few minutes apart!

This incident reminds us in the process 
industries that it is important to report and 
repair any leaks that we detect in piping or other 
equipment. ALL leaks, no matter how small, 
are potentially dangerous. Leaks of toxic, 
combustible, or flammable materials usually 
have higher risks, but, as shown in the pictures, 

…become a BIG leak! (cid:198)
a leak of any material can be 
dangerous. A small leak of a very toxic 
material can be immediately dangerous, 
and a small leak of a flammable or less 
toxic material may grow rapidly, and 
become large enough that it is a major 
fire, explosion, or health hazard.

What can you do?

(cid:206) Immediately report any leak that you observe in the course of your work. Signs of a leak include 
puddles, drips, discolored paint or insulation, and unusual odors. Follow up to make sure that the leak 
is repaired in a timely manner.
(cid:206) Identify leaking material and follow your plant procedures to ensure safety until the leak can be 
repaired. Some examples:  confine or absorb the leaking material, drain it to a safe place, set up 
warning signs or barricades to warn people of the hazard and keep them away, make sure that ignition 
sources are eliminated if the leaking material is flammable or combustible. Your plant emergency and 
leak procedures will include specific actions appropriate for the materials in your plant.
(cid:206) Recognize that it may take time to prepare the plant for maintenance to repair the leak – pipes or 
vessels may have to be emptied, equipment may have to be shut down, equipment may have to be 
isolated from the area where work is to be done. Monitor the leak from a safe location until it can be 
repaired, so appropriate actions can be taken if the leak increases in size.
(cid:206) When monitoring or inspecting equipment normally hidden from view (for example, covered by 
insulation), look for evidence of leaks and report your observations so repairs can be made.

There is no such thing as a “small” leak!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

