 

Safety Alert 004 - ANP/SSM 

Fall of hoisting assembly due to failure of drilling 

drawworks 

 

 

The Superintendence of Operational Safety and Environment is issuing this safety 
alert to notify the petroleum and gas industry and other stakeholders about an incident related to fall of 
hoisting assembly due to failure of drilling drawworks. 

What happened? 

During normal operations running BOP (blowout preventer) with marine riser on an offshore drilling 
unit with dynamic positioning, occurred the unrestrained descent of the hoisting assembly (traveling block 
and top drive). The load came to a complete stop upon the top drive colliding on the drill floor (rotary table), 
remaining two thirds of the BOP below the mudline. There was no point of rupture in the marine riser string.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Potential consequences 

Dropped objects either at sea or at the unit can result in fatalities, environmental or material loss. 
Additionally, excessive friction due to the drawworks steel cable during an unrestrained descent can start a 
fire. 

 

 

 

 

Identified causes 

  Maintenance management failure; 
  Contamination of disc brake with oily substance. 

The accident root cause pointed by the operator investigation was the failure of the drilling unit team 
in NOT following the original equipment manufacturer instructions for tests, inspections and maintenance 
tasks. 

Regulatory Framework 

According  to  item  13.2.1  of  ANP  Resolution no.  43/2007,  the  rig  operator  shall  stablish  plans  and 
procedures  for  inspection,  test  and  maintenance,  in  order  to  seek  mechanical  integrity  of  its  systems, 
structures and Operational Safety Critical Equipment and Systems. Such documentation shall comply with 
manufacturer’s recommendations, standards and engineering practices. 

Item  13.4  Monitoring  and  Results  Assessment  requires  that  unit  operator  will  be  responsible  for 

monitoring and assessing inspections and tests results. 

The  drilling  drawworks  shall  comply  with  NR-12  (Segurança  no  trabalho  em  máquinas  e 

equipamentos) requirements. 

Lessons learned 

  Critical equipment for operational safety shall in accordance with item 2.5.1 of Chapter I of SGSO, 

stablished by ANP Resolution no. 43/2007 or supervening. 

  The  maintenance plan  of  the  drilling unit  shall  be  corrected in order to better  reflect the  original 

equipment manufacturer guidelines. 

For  additional  information  regarding  this  safety  alert,  please  contact  ANP’s  Superintendence  of 

Operational Safety and Environment at incidentes@anp.gov.br. 

Contact 

