 

 

U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and Environmental 
Enforcement 
 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact:  Kevin Sterling 
(504) 731-1523 

BSEE 

 Safety Alert 305 
25 November 2013 

Explosion, Fire and Fatalities West Delta Block 32 Platform E 

On November 16, 2012, Black Elk Energy Offshore Operations, LLC (BEE) had contracted Compass Engineering 
& Consultants, LLC (Compass) and Grand Isle Shipyard, Inc. (GIS) to conduct construction work on West Delta (WD)  
32 E platform.  GIS subcontracted some of their work to DNR Offshore Crewing Services Inc. (DNR).  Wood Group 
Production Services Network (WGPSN) was contracted by Black Elk to ensure safety of the facility and manage production 
operations.  The work included installing piping and a divert valve coming from the LACT Charge Pumps going to the 
discharge piping from the sump to the wet oil tank.  The GIS/DNR workers made two cuts into the piping with a pneumatic 
saw.   In the course of installing the piping, a welder on top of scaffolding began tack welding a flange onto the sump piping.  
When the welder struck his arc and began welding, hydrocarbon vapors from the wet oil tank ignited causing the first 
explosion.  The wet oil tank and the two dry oil tanks all exploded one after the other within seconds between the 
explosions.   These explosions and the resulting fires were the cause of the three fatalities and multiple injuries.  The 
fire was extinguished by the WGPSN Operations crew and several work boats in the area. 

Contributing Causes 

BEE, Compass, GIS/DNR, and WGPSN did not follow BEE Hot Work Policy: 

•  The designated person-in-charge and the welders did not inspect the area in which the work was to be 

performed for potential fire and explosion hazards; 

•  The area was not checked to determine that it was safe to proceed with the welding or burning 

operation, and the designated person-in-charge did not issue written authorization for the work using 
the company’s Welding and Burning Authorization Form; 

•  BEE, Compass, GIS/DNR and WGPSN allowed “hot work” to be performed on piping connected to 

vessels that contained a flammable substance, but did not isolate or render the vessels or piping inert, 
and determined to be safe for welding or burning by the designated person-in-charge; 

•  There was no one properly designated as a Fire Watch in all of the areas where welding and burning 

operations were in progress; 

•  The Fire Watch did not have a portable gas detector in use; 
•  There was a lack of supervision by BEE, Compass, GIS/DNR, and WGPSN.  BEE needed more oversight 

to make sure Safe Work Practices were being followed;  

•  BEE, Compass, GIS/DNR, and WGPSN were not properly involved in the planning and execution of the 
“hot work” being performed.  No one checked to make sure the Hot Work Permit was issued correctly, 
or the white copy returned at the end of each day; 

•  WGPSN did not properly engage in the proper management of the production facility.  WGPSN PIC or 
the other WGPSN Operators did not take ownership of the facility to make sure construction workers 
were engaged in safe activities on the platform. 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

Area where two cuts were made on piping 
coming from sumps on the WD 32 A and 
the WD 32 E platforms, and then going to 
the Wet Oil Tank 

 

 

Direction of flow to Wet Oil Tank 

Scaffolding where men 
were working 

 
Divert valve installed on LACT unit 

Illustration of piping that was 
blown off with Wet Oil Tank 
during the explosion 

Illustration showing 
proximity of where piping 
was going to be installed, 
and connected from the 
divert valve to the sumps 
and Wet Oil Tank piping 

It is recommended that operators conduct a safety stand down for all of its operations that concisely describes the 
fatal accident, and informs its personnel to the following: 

•  Operators should be aware of the need to properly communicate all operations, especially 

modifications to its facilities to examine potential hazards that can negatively affect personnel, equipment 
or the environment; 

•  Operators should ensure a precise chain of command for any work involving contractors on its 

facilities; 

•  Operators should require all operations and contract personnel that are involved in “hot work” to 

attend and participate in a pre-work meeting.  The meeting should involve the initiating of the Hot Work 
Permit and should insure that all hazards are identified, and policies, regulations, contingencies and 
communications are properly implemented; 

•  Operators should require all operations and contract personnel to attend and participate in a pre-job 
JSA meeting, and should ensure that the supervisors of all phases of the work know and understand 
the complete job scope; 

•  Operators, contractors including sub-contractors, and service companies should review their methods of 

initiating a “stop-work” event to ensure that the system adopted will actually be effective under job 
conditions; 

•  Operators and all service companies and contractors should consider emphasizing in their training that 
inadequate, incomplete communications remains one of the most common causes of major accidents, 
especially when performing “hot work”. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an 

accident or a near miss.  It also contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on 

www.BSEE.gov 

 

 

2 

the Outer Continental Shelf. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

