SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

Safety Alert No. 364 
August 13, 2019   

 
 

 
       

                       
            
 

Contact: Jason Mathews 
Phone:    (504) 731-1496 

Improper Riser Tension Leads to Subsea BOP Falling Off 

Wellhead Mandrel and Failure of Riser Adapter 

 

 
 

 

  

            Failed Riser Adapter 

 

                               
On January 14, 2019, a subsea blowout preventer was being disconnected from a wellhead 
mandrel  when  the  BOP  rolled  over  due  to  excessive  weight  applied  at  (i.e.,  not  enough 
tension on) the riser adapter and BOP stack prior to disconnecting the BOP. The weight of 
the riser overloaded the riser adapter, causing bending, which led to the adapter parting 
from the riser.  The failure resulted in the disconnected BOP falling to the seafloor. Prior to 
the incident, the well was secured with multiple plugs; thus, no pollution occurred. 
 
The planned operation was as follows: (1) pressure test against the lower blind shear ram 
and a full function test of the BOP (these steps were both completed); (2) apply a 
predetermined weight to the stack by reducing drilling riser tension; and (3) proceed to 
disconnect the BOP stack and hop the BOP stack to the next well without returning it to 
surface, as approved by BSEE.  
  
The procedure did not prescribe a specific weight to apply to the BOP prior to release.  
The Company Representative and Drilling Contractor reviewed the data and agreed on a 
set amount of weight, or tension, to be applied to the BOP stack prior to opening the 
primary connector latch.  The Drilling Contractor, who was responsible for performing the 
adjustment to the riser tension system, adjusted the riser tension to a different weight for 

reasons unknown. Even with the tensioner weight information displayed on the drill floor, 
he released more weight than previously agreed.   
 
After the riser tension was adjusted, the underwater Remotely Operated Vehicle inserted 
the flying lead into the hydraulic stab on the BOP ROV panel and unlocked the primary 
connector from the wellhead.  The BOP shifted to a 45-degree tilt.  The resulting tilt put 
undue bending stresses on the tapered joint above the BOP, and it completely failed 
some hours later.  The BOP came to rest on the seafloor after the joint failure.  An 
independent third-party review concluded the riser adapter failed due to reduced top 
tension while unlatching the wellhead connector. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Develop a comprehensive procedure for unlatching a subsea BOP.  The procedure 

should incorporate all the necessary calculations to determine the appropriate 
tension settings for all unlatching scenarios.  Base the procedure specifics on actual 
conditions including, but not limited to, weight of the BOP, water depth, weight of the 
drilling riser in seawater, weight of riser fluid, and all other pertinent factors. 

•  Unlatching procedures for BOPs should make reference to riser analysis in the body 

of the program and provide a hold point for review and verification of riser tension 
being set to the recommended setting point prior to landing the BOP and unlatching 
the BOP.  

•  Establish an Emergency Disconnect Sequence (EDS) weight down for simulation 

and an EDS over pull for actual EDS function, if required. 

•  Establish safe operating parameters for all drilling operations.  Drilling contractors 

and operators should be equipped with proper information and calculations to know 
when any operation is outside normal expectations and needs to be reevaluated.   

•  Re-evaluate all risk assessments associated with moving a BOP at depth from well 

to well.     

•  Ensure that all rig personnel understand the risks associated with disconnecting 

blowout preventers from wellhead mandrels and all additional risks associated with 
hopping a BOP stack to the next well. Ensure that personnel fully understand the 
jobs they are performing, and perform the necessary risk assessments and 
calculations that will make each job safe. 

 

--BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

