 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 362 
July 29, 2019 

 

 
       

 
            

                       
 

 

Contact: Jason Mathews 
Phone:    (504) 731-1496 

Poor Tag Line Awareness Leads to Multiple Incidents  

 

 
 

 

       

   
 Layout of lift with the locations of relevant parties in January 2019 Incident. Rigger 1 became entangled in the  
excess tag line (the tag line in this photo was inserted to simulate conditions prior to the incident). 

                               
 

 

Three incidents recently occurred in the Gulf of Mexico involving oil and natural gas 
operations associated with the use of tag lines. Due to the potential severity of these 
three incidents, which occurred over a six-month span, BSEE is providing the following 
details:  
 
January 2019 − During a blind lift to move a tank to a new location, a rigger grasping one 
of the tag lines was unknowingly standing in a loop in the middle section of the tag line.  
As the load lifted vertically, the crew lead noticed that the tag line had wrapped around 
the rigger’s ankle and called an “all-stop.”  Before the crane operator could stop all 
activity, the rigger was lifted approximately five feet off the deck.  The crane lowered the 
worker to the deck without injury.   
 

May 2019 − A rigger became entangled in a tag line during a lift from a boat.  The rigger 
was lifted approximately 10 feet.  The rigger freed his leg from the tag line, fell to the boat 
deck below, and suffered an ankle injury.  The rigger was transported to shore for further 
treatment. 
 
July 2019 − A rigger was unaware of his body placement with respect to a tag line. The 
tag line wrapped around the rigger’s leg. During boat loading operations, the crane lifted 
the rigger off the boat deck. As he was lifted off the boat, the rigger held onto the tag line 
and remained vertical until being lowered back to the boat deck without injury.  
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Make sure riggers are mindful of tag line locations prior to starting a lift. Riggers 

should stand away from the tag line to prevent entanglement. 

•  Ensure that crane operators verify, via hand signals and/or radio, that all riggers and 

spotters are ready before beginning a lift. 

•  During lift planning, ensure that there will always be more than one way to 

communicate an “all-stop” to the crane operator. 

•  Have workers check for proper tag line length before each lift.  Excess tag line 
length is always a potential hazard for entanglement. During pre-job meetings, 
dangers associated with tag line entanglement should be discussed. 

•  During pre-job planning, consideration should be given to the effects of vessel 

motion (heave and displacement) on tag line length, slack, and personnel situational 
awareness. 

•  Ensure that all personnel understand the risks associated with tag lines and 

perform the necessary risk assessments and calculations required for the job.   

 
 

 

--BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

