Safety Alert  No. 319                                                                                            Contact: Jason Mathews 
 
February 29, 2016                                                                                               Phone: (504)  731-1496
  

Chemical Injection Point  Corrosion Causes Production Header Failure  

 

Recently, an  18-in low pressure production  
header on a  producing platform in the Gulf of  
Mexico failed under normal working pressure.  
The failure ruptured the header, opening a 10-ft 
long  split and releasing production fluids at a  
pressure of 250-psi.  Three workers were 
sprayed with  production fluid and approximately  
25 bbls were  released.  The event resulted in the  
evacuation of the platform.  
 
An investigation by BSEE concluded  the failure  
was caused by a corrosive  loss of pipe integrity  
immediately  beneath a  chemical drip injection  
point  used  to introduce an acidic  demulsifier into  
the flow stream.   Over  time the demulsifier  
corroded away approximately 50-percent of  the  
metal  thickness of the  pipe below  the injection  
point.  
 

BSEE  concluded that  the proper procedure would have been to inject the acidic demulsifier into the pipe  
using an injection quill.  The injection quill would have introduced  the demulsifier into  the middle of  the  
flow stream keeping it from continually impacting  the pipe wall in proximity  to  the injection point.      
 
BSEE recommends  that Operators develop procedures ensuring the proper use, installation, and  
 
verification of chemical injection 
equipment.   We also recommend  
that  Operators conduct both visual  
and non-destructive testing of all 
corrosive chemical injection points  
to verify that  the recommended  
injections quills are installed and  
that  the existing piping has not  
been compromised  by the injection process.  
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to  inform the  offshore  oil  and gas industry of  the circumstances  
surrounding  an  accident  or  a near miss.  It  also contains recommendations  that should help   
prevent  the recurrence of  such an incident on  the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 

 

 

