 SAFETY ALERT  

Safety Alert No. 325  
 
18 October 2017  
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Contact: Douglas Morris 
Phone: (202) 208-3974 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

Bolt Failures 

 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has been informed about 
a recent subsea bolt1 failure by a European offshore safety regulator and the original 
equipment manufacturer (OEM) of the affected Blowout Preventer (BOP).  The specific 
bolt failure described herein occurred during a 21 day BOP high pressure test at a water 
depth of approximately 7,382 feet.  A leak was observed in the area of the lower marine 
riser package (LMRP) connector.  The leak did not result in a loss of well control or 
personal injury.  
 
Upon inspecting the BOP and LMRP 
on the surface, personnel noted that 
13 of 20 bolts failed at the LMRP 
connector.  The BOP OEM and an 
independent test laboratory are 
currently conducting testing to 
determine the root cause for the failure 
by evaluating the bolts’ material 
properties.  At this time, it is suspected 
that the reason for this failure is that 
the raw material and/or heat treatment 
processes were not suitable for the 
bolts intended use. 
 
Although this bolt failure did not occur 
on the U.S. OCS, BSEE is aware of 
multiple U.S. OCS bolt failures 
associated with subsea critical 
equipment (connectors, LMRP, BOP) 
which pose recurring  
risks to oil and gas operations and the 
environment.  Operators should 
continue to work with drilling contractors and OEMs to ensure that these components 
meet the latest industry standards and best practices. Details on previous OCS bolt 
failure occurrences and BSEE reports can be found at: www.bsee.gov/bolts. 
 
 

Generalized blowout preventer (BOP). This example is not meant to 
be indicative of the blowout preventer discussed in this Safety Alert. 
 

 

1 For this Safety Alert, the term “bolt” includes all types of fastening devices, such as a stud. 

BSEE Recommends:  

Operators should work with their OEMs to do the following: 
 

  Confirm that all customers and assemblies using the affected heat treatment lot 

number TN-696 have been notified directly by the supplying OEM.  BSEE 
supports this OEM’s recommendation that all connectors utilizing bolts from this 
heat treated lot should be removed from service until the bolts have been 
changed out.  

  Verify that all in-service components’ material properties are in compliance with 

your BOP OEM’s specifications and the latest industry standards. 

  Verify that all installation and maintenance procedures (including equipment 

calibration, lubrication, torque processes, and recorded torque values) satisfy 
OEM specifications and ensure that best practices are effectively implemented. 
 

  Report any failures to OEMs and appropriate industry organizations in a timely 

manner to ensure the prompt communication of relevant data to the industry. 

 
BSEE is continuing to evaluate the bolt failures discussed in this Safety Alert to 
determine if long-term action is needed to prevent potential future failures on the OCS. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations that should help prevent the 
recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf.  

