 

BSEE 
 

 

 
 
Safety Alert No. 303 
 
29 January 2013 
 
 

 

 
 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and Environmental 
 
Enforcement 
 
 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

 

 

Safety 
 
Alert 
 

 
Contact:  Lance Labiche 
(504) 736-2433 
 

Lower Marine Riser Package (LMRP) Connector Failure 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
On January 24, 2013, BSEE personnel met with industry to discuss initial findings associated 
with a pollution incident involving the discharge of synthetic base mud (SBM) into the Gulf of 
Mexico (GOM) due to a loss of integrity of a LMRP H-4 connector. During this meeting, a 
 
qualified third-party presented preliminary evidence that the stress corrosion cracking caused by 
 
 
hydrogen embrittlement was a contributor to the incident.  It was introduced that zinc 
 
electroplating without proper baking, as per ASTM B633, was a possible cause of hydrogen 
 
embrittlement.  During this meeting, BSEE was informed of two other rigs as having H-4 
connector bolt failures. 
 
 
On January 25, 2013, BSEE received information from the connector vendor which identified 
rigs as having blowout preventer (BOP) stack connectors that may contain bolts that may no 
longer be fit for purpose.  BSEE issued emails to the associated operators of the subset of rigs 
 
with current well operations in the Gulf of Mexico.  The content of the emails notified these 
 
operators of the initial findings and gave specific instructions on securing the current well 
 
operations in order to retrieve the LMRP and/or BOP to the surface, if not already on the surface.  
These operators were directed to then suspend operations until the existing bolts on the LMRP 
 
connector/wellhead connector could be changed out with bolts that have been certified by an 
independent third-party to be in compliance with recommended heat treatment practices or the 
existing bolts have been examined and certified by an independent third-party that they are fit for 
 
purpose. 
 
 
In order to ensure all of these affected bolts are identified and proper corrective action is taken, 
 
BSEE recommends the following: 
 
 
Operators are hereby urged to make an inventory of your contracted rigs [currently involved in 
well operations in the Gulf of Mexico Outer Continental Shelf (GOM) or planned to conduct 
 
well operations in the GOM] and investigate the bolts of the LMRP and Wellhead connectors.  
For detailed instructions on identifying affected bolts please refer to the Safety Notice issued by 
 
GE Oil and Gas on January 25, 2013, titled,  “H4 Connector Bolt Inspection Required(P/N 
 
H10004-2)” at the following: http://www.ge-energy.com/connector-update.jsp 
 
 
If you have H-4 connectors, as identified in GE’s safety notice, and have verified through 
 
documentation that the connector contains any affected bolts, you should immediately notify 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BSEE.  You should also consult with your contractors and subcontractors to determine the 
 
appropriate inspection, disposition and/or corrective actions.  BSEE will require an independent 
 
third-party certification that confirms proper inspection and refurbishment processes were 
completed prior to reinstallation of any affected bolts.   
 
 
Operators should review the QA/QC programs for all equipment vendors (contracted and sub­
contracted) to ensure that all equipment is being manufactured to the required specifications.   
Special attention should be given to ensure proper heat treating has taken place in accordance 
with the specifications. 
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

Upper half of failed LMRP Connector  

                                       

Lower half of failed LMRP Connector 
 

 

               
 

 

 

--BSEE--GOMR-­
www.bsee.gov 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and 
 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an 
incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 
 
 

