 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and 
 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 
 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Safety 
 
Alert 

 
Contact:  Rob Carroll 
(504) 736-2671 

 
BSEE 

 

Safety Alert No. 307 
 
19 March 2014 

Lower  Stairwell Step  Collapses  Causing  Injury 

An injury  occurred when  a contract employee was  descending  the mezzanine well deck area 
heading  to the lower second deck.  When the  Injured Person (IP) reached the last step, the  
fiberglass bracing  of the  metal step collapsed causing  the worker to fall to the deck and injure his  
knee.  

 

A BSEE investigation revealed the following  for  the fiberglass bracing:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

•	   The bracing  supporting  the  step may  have 

exceeded the manufacturer’s 20-year  life 

expectancy.
  

•	   The bracing  may  have deteriorated due to 


periodic exposure to chemicals or 

prolonged exposure to weather or 

excessive vibration. 
 

•	   Unless inspected closely,  the bracing 


appeared to be  in  good condition. 
 

The onsite  Lease  Operator took the following  
steps to prevent the reoccurrence of  this incident:  

•	   Replaced the fiberglass bracing  with 
 

more durable aluminum supports. 
 

•	   Added diagonal and cross bracing  for 


•	  

•	  

additional strength  and support. 
 
Installed J-bolts to secure  stairway  to 

lower  grating  deck.
  
Inspected similar construction on all 

associated facilities to verify  the safety  of 

the  step bracing  of  all stairwells. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that  Lessees, Operators and their Contractors should:  

•	  
•	  

Inspect all stairwells to determine the type of bracing  that supports the  steps.  
Install and maintain all fiberglass bracing  as per  the manufacturer’s installation and 
maintenance  recommendations.  

•	   Schedule periodic maintenance to ensure adherence to manufacturer’s recommendations  

with  regard to fiberglass  bracing.  

•	   Take  specific precautions  to aging  fiberglass bracing  construction nearing  the 


manufacturer’s  replacement  recommendations. 
 

--BSEE--GOMR-­ 

www.gomr.BSEE.gov  

A  Safety  Alert  is  a tool  used  by  BSEE  to  inform  the  offshore  oil  and  gas  
industry  of the circumstances  surrounding  an  accident  or a near miss.   It  also 
contains  recommendations  that  should  help prevent  the recurrence  of such  
an  incident  on  the  Outer Continental  Shelf.  

