SAFETY ALERT 

Safety Alert No. 343 
19 November 2018 

 
 

 
 

 
 

                   Contact: Jason Mathews 
       

         Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Worker Falls from Height into Water 

Location of crane mechanic at the time of the incident (left) and view over the handrail (right) 

On 7 July 2018, a contract crane mechanic (CCM) fell 81 feet into the water below as he 
was  replacing the  platform crane’s anti-two block  control valve.  A  10-ft  ladder had  been 
positioned between the overboard handrail and the crane for the CCM’s use. As the CCM 
was positioned on the crane skid located seven feet above the deck, he realized that he 
needed to descend the ladder to retrieve additional tools. As the CCM repositioned himself 
onto the ladder in order to descend, he either lost his grip or his footing, which caused him 
to fall backwards over the handrail and into the water. 

High winds prevented the CCM from retrieving a life vest initially thrown to him, but later he 
was able to retrieve a vest that had been placed in a life ring. Strong currents then caused 
him to drift further from the platform. Approximately 45 minutes after the incident began, a 
fishing vessel rescued the CCM and transported him back to the platform. The CCM was 
then flown onshore for treatment and was diagnosed with fractures of cervical and lumbar 
vertebrae. 

The safe work practices in effect at the time of the incident required the CCM to use fall 
protection for heights that exceed six feet above the deck. Additionally, Coast Guard 
Regulation 33 CFR 146.20 requires the wearing of work vests when working near or over 
water. The CCM was using neither item, nor did the JSA identify falling as a potential 
hazard that necessitated mitigation. 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 

·  Review this Safety Alert with all offshore personnel. 

·  Ensure procedures are implemented that establish minimum requirements for 

working at unguarded, elevated work locations that are six feet or greater above 
floor/grade level or that present a potential for fall and/or injury to personnel. 

·  Verify company and contract personnel working at heights near or above water are 

knowledgeable and experienced in the work practices necessary to perform their job 
in a safe and environmentally sound manner. 

·  Review job pre-planning procedures to ensure response plans, fall rescue plans, 
emergency response numbers, and fast response craft are included if necessary. 

·  Consider equipment position and hazards when completing job pre-planning in order 

to minimize risk. 

·  For more information, consult the Accident Investigation Report 

(https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/files/sm105-fieldwood-07jul2018.pdf) 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.

