 
 

 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 332 
11 May 2018  

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

            Contact: Jason Mathews  
 
      Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Crane Hazards Identified by BSEE in Risk Based Inspections 

BSEE and USCG Inspectors identified missing bolt from the boom heel section on platform crane, poorly maintained 

lifting equipment, and numbers faded off of a boom angle indicator during crane risk inspections. 

 

The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently conducted a review on the 
latest  compliance and incident  data to identify  safety  trends  throughout the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  The 
analysis  pointed  to  a  potential  risk  associated  with  lifting  safety  and  cranes.  Between  January 
2016 and December 2017, 178 crane incidents were reported to BSEE by 30 unique operators. 
Further, the Agency issued 103 crane-related incidents of non-compliance (INCs) during the same 
timeframe. To reduce the likelihood of future incidents or compliance issues, BSEE developed  a 
protocol to conduct targeted Crane Performance Based Risk Inspections (PBRI) on 30 production 
platforms and 10 well operations in the Gulf of Mexico Region over a two day period. 
 
At the completion of the inspections, BSEE further reviewed the results supplied by the  districts 
and  conducted  additional  reviews  on  Safety  and  Environmental  Management  System  specific 
items  –  e.g.,  crane  inspection  (pre-use,  monthly,  quarterly,  and/or  annual)  records,  lifting  Safe 
Work  Practices,  competency  of  riggers  and  crane  operators,  maintenance  of  lifting  equipment 
(slings, rigging components, etc.), JSAs, etc.. The findings were: 
 

  Approximately 12.5 percent of the facilities involved in the PBRI had documented incidents 

of noncompliance.  

  BSEE was able to determine operators are conducting crane inspections in accordance 

with API RP-2D, Operation and Maintenance of Offshore Cranes, 6th edition; however, 
evidence suggested that the inspections are not effective in identifying all deficiencies 
and/or operators are not aggressively closing out noted deficiencies.  

  During the Lifting Safety PBRI, BSEE inspectors were able to conclude that a majority of 
the operators subjected to the inspection had no method for following the manufacturer’s 
recommendations for preventative maintenance, track maintenance records, or to replace 
lifting equipment (slings, components, etc.) on schedule.  

  About 20 percent of the facilities inspected during the PBRI had no load-indicating system 

in place, or had no available record(s) of calibration.  

  The inspections suggest that operators Safe Work Practices (SWP) with tag lines are not 

implemented, specific to line length/strength requirements, or personnel are not familiar 
with those that exist. 

  Overall, training documents were readily available to BSEE Inspectors during the 

inspections to verify minimum requirements were being met; however, there was a 
noticeable gap on the determination of a crane operator, crane inspector, or rigger’s 
competency after training.  

  BSEE identified multiple facilities which lacked evidence of personnel that are 

knowledgeable of proper lifting signals as referenced in API RP 2D, Operation and 
Maintenance of Offshore Cranes, 6th edition. 

  BSEE identified multiple facilities and operators which lacked personnel transfer 

procedures, specifically those that covered weather and sea conditions.  

  During the PBRI, BSEE identified multiple facilities and operators which lacked evidence 

of companies informing their offshore personnel of the circumstances surrounding an 
accident or near miss information release by BSEE.  

  Overall, simultaneous operations (SIMOP) plans were readily available to BSEE 

inspectors during the inspections; however, there was evidence to suggest multiple 
operators fail to address lifting operations within their SIMOPs plan. 

BSEE regulation 30 CFR § 250.108 set the requirements for cranes and other 
material handling equipment for operators.  Therefore, BSEE recommends that 
operators: 

  Verify that all API RP 2D required inspections are being performed and ensure all 

associated equipment and systems are operating as intended. Further, operators should 
develop and maintain a crane maintenance tracker that clearly assigns an individual (or 
individuals) responsible for correcting the deficiencies. 

  Review Section 5 of API RP 2D, Wire Rope and Sling Inspection, Replacement and 

Maintenance, and develop and/or implement a maintenance program that focuses on lifting 
equipment, such as slings, wire rope, etc.. 

  Although load indicators must not be used to test cranes, the readings should be recorded 
on each lift where load indicators are installed on the crane. Additionally, if load indicators 
are present, Operators should have calibration procedures in place. 

  All lifts on the OCS should be evaluated for all risks, and the appropriate tag lines and use of 

tag lines should be reviewed. This includes defined length, strength, and diameter.  

  Develop procedures, beyond requiring training certifications, to ensure understanding and 
competency for crane operators, riggers, and crane inspectors. These procedures should 
specifically address how an operator verifies lifting personnel have adequate retention of the 
required knowledge and skills to carry out their duties. 

  Review the API RP 2D Figure 1: “Standard Hand Signals for Controlling Crane Operations” 

and verify those signals are implemented and understood by all lifting personnel on their 
facilities. 

  Review BSEE Safety Alert 331 and develop/implement personnel transfer procedures as 

discussed the recommendations presented within the alert. 

  Review how they disseminate safety and environmental information to direct and contract 
personnel to ensure all offshore personnel are knowledgeable on the hazards identified by 
BSEE. 

  Review their SIMOP plans and address lifting operations where applicable. 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

