SAFETY ALERT 
 

 

Safety Alert No. 353 
4 June 2019 

 

 
 

 
 

 
       

                     Contact: Jason Mathews 
            

Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Offshore Employees Fall Through Grating and Open Hole 

 

 
 

 

   
 

 

      Incident site at EI 331 B – photo taken May 29th        Incident site at GC 205 A – photo taken June 2nd 
 
Recently at Eugene Island Block 331, Platform “B,” a night-time production operator on a 
fixed facility was identified as missing from the platform during morning rounds. The 
personnel onboard noticed a section of grating displaced in the upright position with the 
missing person’s hardhat and clipboard next to the grating in the wellbay deck. The open 
hole measured approximately 93-inches long by 13-1/2 inches wide and was 
approximately 45 feet to the water's surface. Preliminary information indicates that prior to 
the incident the wellbay deck area was taped off with red “DANGER” tape, but the area 
was not hard barricaded to prevent flow of personnel. 
 
A second incident took place at Green Canyon Block 205 “A”. A wireline crew had 
completed work on a well which was properly barricaded. At approximately 2300 hours, 
two employees went to replace the well access hatch cover over the well on the drill deck.  
Preliminary information indicates that each of the two employees inadvertently picked up 
the wrong hatch cover (identified in the photograph above with a red arrow). Each 
employee grabbed one handle of the cover, which was the same color as the deck and 
had no well identifying information on it. This action unknowingly created an open hole; 
and as the employees moved the hatch, one of the employees stepped and fell through 
the hole to the deck below – approximately 90 feet. 
 
The exact causes of these incidents are now under investigation. Because the potential 
factors involved in these incidents may be common to many facilities on the Federal 
Outer Continental Shelf. BSEE recommends all operators and contractors inspect their 
facilities and communicate the associated hazards to all personnel. 
 
 

Additionally, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Review this Safety Alert with your crew and discuss hazardous areas and 

encourage feedback to ensure understanding. 

•  Conduct a review on the integrity of decks, grating, and structural and support 

beams on your facility. If an area of marginal or suspect strength is identified, ensure 
that it is clearly marked, appropriate mitigation actions are taken, and employees are 
informed of those zones.  

•  Conduct a review of your facility to identify any open holes or surfaces that are not 

capable of supporting personnel and, if such an area or open hole is identified, 
ensure that it has been properly barricaded and/or covered. 

•  Conduct a review of your facility to confirm that all grating and flooring sections are 

securely fastened to the underlying structural members.  Access should be 
prevented to areas where the grating and flooring sections are not securely fastened 
to the underlying structural members or barricaded as described below. 

•  To prevent the flow of personnel into hazardous areas, verify all barricades: 

o  have a top rail and middle rail;  
o  are at least 42 inches in height and capable of withstanding a load of at least 

200 lbs. applied in any direction. 

• 

If an open hole is found that cannot be immediately barricaded as described above, 
identify an Open Hole Attendant / Hole Watch, with no other duties − and ensure 
that the person is equipped with adequate fall protection at all times. 

•  Management and facility supervisors should ensure the workspace organization, 

proper labeling of equipment and the conduct of operations are fully and constantly 
reviewed for safety hazards before and during operations. 

 

 

•  Operators should ensure that all personnel wear fall protection when necessary 

and that a secure connection for the fall protection be provided and used. 

•  Ensure that personnel confirm that job safety analyses align with approved 

procedures and address hazards specific to the job. Additionally, task supervision 
should ensure and represent an orderly completion of job steps. 

 

- - BSEE - - 

 

 

 

 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

