 

 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 348 
25 April 2019 

 

 
 

 
       

                     Contact: Nicholas Fraiche 
            

Phone:    (504) 736-7631 

Chemical Leak in Flying Lead Discovered by ROV 

                                 

 

 
 
 

   

With the outer jacket wire braiding removed, the HFL hose inner sheath was revealed to be in a collapsed condition.  

  

 
On April 30, 2018, BSEE received a report of a subsea umbilical leak coming from a 
Hydraulic Flying Lead (HFL) used for chemical injection.  An ROV operator performing a 
survey for a future PLET installation discovered paraffin inhibitor (Nalco EC 6004A, which 
contains the chemical naphthalene) leaking into the Gulf of Mexico. It was later 
discovered that the chemical injection lines had sustained either breaches or breaks in 
two locations.  The estimated maximum total volume of the discharge was 900 barrels.  
 
The investigation revealed that the hose assembly was rated for the appropriate collapse 
pressure. The system had been installed in 2015 and tested to demonstrate full pressure 
integrity.  At an unknown time after May 1, 2017 (the date of the most recent prior ROV 
inspection), the outer jacket of the chemical injection line sustained damage.  Once the 
outer jacket was damaged, the line's collapse resistance was compromised. Positive 
pressure was not maintained in the chemical injection line, which resulted in a collapsed 
and torn line. The leaks were undetectable from the water’s surface, either visibly or by 
detection instruments, due to the water depth in which the facility is located.  
 

 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Update operating procedures to ensure that umbilical lines are positively 

pressured. 

maintenance tasks.    

•  Provide operator training to ensure that lines are not bled to a zero pressure during 

Install a check valve to the system topsides to ensure a positive pressure is 
maintained on the system.  

Install a low-pressure alarm on the chemical pump skid for any injection lines that 
are connected subsea with a hose. 

•  Monitor fluid inventories of fluids that are pumped subsea. 

•  Consider subsea hose assembly movement (such as chafing, rubbing, friction, 

etc.) during design. 

Inspect subsea equipment on a regular basis utilizing ROV visual video recordings. 
The visual subsea equipment inspections include inspections of umbilical lines, 
subsea wellheads, subsea manifolds, etc. The regular visual inspections should 
identify initial issues with the subsea installation, as well as later life issues which 
occur during production operations.  

                                                        -- BSEE-- 

• 

• 

• 

 
 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

