SAFETY ALERT 

Safety Alert No. 339   
3 AUGUST 2018  
 

             
 

 

               Contact: Jason Mathews 
 
         Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Running of Gas Sensing Line in Cable Tray Leads to Fire 

On April 14, 2018, personnel on a Gulf of Mexico production platform witnessed a small 
flame, approximately one foot in length, commencing from a section of an electrical cable 
tray. The facility was shut-in, personnel mustered, and the fire was extinguished with a 
portable hand-held extinguisher. The wiring tray was located above the Lease Automatic 
Custody Transfer (LACT) unit on the platform. 

                        

                   Damaged Area from Fire.    

 

 

Bottom-view of Cable Damage. 

During the incident investigation, a defect was discovered in the electrical wiring within 
the cable tray. Deterioration appears to have occurred over time to the outer PVC jacket 
and inner aluminum armor. This condition may have caused internal conductors to be 
exposed. The defect in the wiring subsequently introduced a hazardous electrical arc. The 
electrical arc extended across the cable tray, which damaged the ¼ inch gas pressure 
sensing line that ran within the tray. As a result, the gas pressure sensing line began to 
leak fluid. The fluid leak in this line, combined with the source of ignition (the electrical 
arc), produced a small flame that scorched an area approximately one square foot. No 
injuries resulted from this incident. 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following options: 

·  Review company and/or contractor operating procedures for electrical installations 

to confirm that the documentation includes verifying that raceways or cable trays 
containing electrical conductors do not also contain any pipe, tube, or equivalent for 
steam, water, air , gas, drainage, or any service other than electrical as per API RP 
14F that reference NEC 300.8. 

· 

Inspect all raceways or cable trays with electrical conductors to ensure they do not 
also contain any pipe, tube, or equal for steam, water, air, gas, drainage, or any 
service other than electrical as per API RP 14F that reference NEC 300.8. Install or 
reroute non-electrical piping in areas away from trays containing electrical 
conductors. 

·  To avoid potential defects in wiring, ensure that personnel (direct and/or contractor 

employees) have adequate knowledge and skills for the proper installation of 
electrical conductors within raceways and cable trays. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.

