 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and 
 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

Safety 
Alert 

 
                                                     Contact: Jack Williams 
(504) 736-1757 

BSEE 

Safety Alert No. 301 
13 April 2012 
 

 

Fall/Fatality during P&A/Platform Abandonment:   

Supervision, Operational, Equipment, and Organization Errors  

 

An offshore roustabout was fatally injured while assisting P&A’ing wells and decommissioning a 
production platform.   The P&A operation was being conducted on the main deck of the platform, using 
a power swivel skid, casing jack, and crane, in conjunction with other equipment.  
 
The accident occurred at night while the power swivel was being moved from atop the well with the 
roustabout acting as a rigger helping control the load.  When the power swivel was lifted, the roustabout 
stepped, or was dragged by the load into the well-access opening in the deck that was exposed by the 
movement of the power swivel, and fell to his death.  Night medevac callout was delayed due to 
 
confusion in emergency planning. 
    

 

 

 

 

An investigation by BSEE personnel concluded the following factors contributed to the accident: 
 

 
	  The supervisor and company man on site did not have an emergency plan with medevac  

procedure and contact information readily available.  
 

 
	  The pre-shift JSA meeting did not address the hole in the main deck beneath the power swivel.  
The JSA meeting was not attended by all parties including the roustabout, and no signed, unique 
JSA form was created. 
 

 
	  The pre-lift “tool-box” meeting did not discuss the existence of the hole beneath the power 

swivel, and no fall protection was provided as required by company policies, BSEE, and USGC. 
 
 

 
	  The power swivel skid was equipped with two “tag lines” that were only three-feet long thus 

requiring the riggers to be in close proximity to the load.  The tag lines were attached to the power 
swivel in such a way that they would drag across the open hole as the skid was moved; 
 
  

 
	  Other P&A equipment on the platform was positioned poorly and interfered with the crane 

 

operation. 

 

 
o	  A rudimentary, inherently dangerous, “pipe rack area” allowed the box ends of 15 joints 
of work string to protrude over the skid, requiring riggers to manually maneuver the load 
to keep from hitting the pipe.  

 

 

 
o	  The temporarily stored casing jack interfered in the crane operator’s vision of the lift.  
 
o	  The lighting may have been inadequate for a night operation. 

 
  Management and on-site supervision failed to address safety hazards and equipment deficiencies 

in planning, and made operational errors that contributed to the cause of the accident.  
  

 
  There was no clearly designated, direct supervision of the lift because of multiple responsibilities 

assigned to the only supervisor on duty. 

 
BSEE recommends the following to operators conducting plug and abandonment and platform 
decommissioning operations. 
 
 

	  Medical evacuation procedures and contact should be prominently displayed and all crew 
 

 

members acquainted with that information and the procedures.  

  
	  P&A/platform decommissioning operations should have a comprehensive safety evaluation for 
 
 

the organization of multiple simultaneous tasks. 
 

	  A fully attended and comprehensive JSA that covers all the risks should be a requirement. 
 
 

	  Fall protection should be available and used in the presence of open holes, or if holes may be 
 

 

exposed in the course of an operation. 
 

   

   

 

 

  

 

 
  

 

 
	  A lift should be evaluated for all risks, and the appropriate tag lines, and use of tag lines, should 

be reviewed. 

 
	  Management and supervisors should insure the work space organization, availability of necessary 
 

equipment, proper positioning of equipment, and the conduct of operations, be fully and 
constantly reviewed for safety hazards before and during operations. 

 
	  Management should assign enough supervisors to P&A/platform decommissioning operations to 

allow direct, oversight of operations. 

 
 
A full report of the accident can be reviewed on the BSEE site.  To access the site, click on link 
as follows: 
  
http://www.bsee.gov/Inspection-and-Enforcement/Accidents-and-Incidents/Panel-Investigation-
Reports/Panel-Investigation-Reports.aspx 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

--BSEE--GOMR--

www.gomr.BSEE.gov 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas 

industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss.  It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such 

an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

