 

BSEE 
 

 
 
Safety Alert No. 304 
 
1 February 2013 
 

 

 

 

Safety 
 
Alert 
 

U.S. Department of the Interior 
 
Bureau of Safety and Environmental 
 
Enforcement 
 
 

                                                     

Contact: Glynn Breaux 
 
(504) 736-2560 
 

Boom Hoist Wire Rope Failure Results in Fatality 

   

 

 

Personnel were using the platform crane to load a rental generator onto a vessel.  Positioned close to the lift 
 
were two tanks and a 14-ft high lubricator.  Two riggers were using tag lines to stabilize the load. 
 

 
  

 
 

  

 

 

 

When the load was lifted, the crane’s boom hoist wire rope parted.  The boom fell, struck the generator, and 
broke into three sections with the nose section falling overboard.  The falling nose section dragged the attached 
 
bridle behind it until its fall was arrested by the main hoist line and bridle pendant lines. 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The 850-lb bridle/sheaves struck the fallen boom and ricocheted off the end coming to rest against the 
platform toe-board.  The rigger handling the left tag line was struck by the bridle and fatally injured. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

  A BSEE accident investigation Panel  concluded that  the causes  of the  fatality were as follows:  
 

(1) 	  The Crane’s boom hoist wire rope parted due to being weakened by  advanced  corrosion.  

(2) 	  The vicinity of  the  lift was  constrained by other equipment which caused the  riggers  to use tag lines to 
control the load, and to be  positioned in the path of the falling boom.  The positioning of  riggers in  the  
case of  a boom hoist wire rope failure was not considered during the  JSA.    

(3)	   The crane’s corroded boom hoist wire  rope  lacked  internal lubrication; probably because of improper  

lubrication method, frequency, and an improper lubricant type.  

(4)	   The annual  inspection of  the crane conducted six months previous  probably did not include a
  

comprehensive examination of the boom hoist  wire rope. 
 

(5)	   The Operator had no company m  anual for crane operations.  It is possible that an internal company  

policy for crane operations  may have led to actions that prevented the  incident.  

(6)	   The detachment of the main block hook from the  load may have allowed the bridle to be pulled all the  

way to the  railing, striking the rigger, rather  than remaining atop the  fallen boom.   

(7) 	  The crane’s operator and those supervising the  lift  possibly did not give “special attention”  to all of the  

crane’s wire rope lines during the pre-use inspection per recommendations of API RP-2D.  

 
BSEE recommends the following to Operators:  
 

• 	  Operators should  review their methods of inspection of crane wire ropes  to insure full and 


comprehensive examination as  per API RP-2D.   
 

o 	  Third  party crane inspections should be checked and verified by Operator personnel.   
o 	  Coats of heavy  grease on the crane lines should be  removed during inspections  so that  the  

external and internal integrity of the lines  can  be examined.  

o 	  Special attention  should  be given  to  indications of changing wire rope  diameters (both 

increasing and decreasing).  

o 	  Wire ropes  should be  regularly lubricated with the proper  lubricants, using recommended 

methodology to ensure full  penetration by the  lubricant. 

• 	  Operators  should review equipment location prior  to making a lift.  Removing or relocating 
 

obstructing equipment in the interest of  safety should be strongly considered.   


• 	  Operators should review the positioning of riggers using tag lines  for all possible  emergency 
 

contingencies.  
   

• 	  Operators should consider implementing a method of recording wire rope lubrication data for cranes, 

including date, personnel, type and brand of lubricant, method of application, etc.  

 
A full account of the accident and investigation can be found on the following web site.  
 

www.BSEE.gov 
 

 

. 
 

 

A Safety Alert  is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances  
surrounding an accident or a near miss.  It also contains recommendations that should help prevent the  

recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf.  

