SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 327 
8 December 2017  

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

              Contact: Jason Mathews  
 
        Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Failure to Properly Purge Compressors Leads to Explosions 

 
Recently, two safety incidents have occurred relating to compressors not being purged properly 
prior to start-up.  These incidents involved inadequate Job Safety Analysis’ (JSAs) and improper 
purging procedures.   
 

Compressor Scavenger Box after Explosion 

 

 

 

  10 June 2017: During normal startup operations, the gas compressor ran for 

approximately twenty minutes before shutting down due to a platform air compressor 
problem. After the air compressor was back on line there were two failed attempts to 
restart the gas compressor. The mechanic then made adjustments to the magnetic pickup 
and the flywheel. Two attempts later, the gas compressor appeared to be starting, but 
after 2-3 seconds, the engine backfired. The subsequent explosion sent the scavenger 
box and debris airborne and ignited the paper filters in the filter housing. The fire was 
immediately extinguished; however, the mechanic standing next to the air box was injured 
by flying debris that contacted his chin and upper body.  

The initial investigation indicates that failure to properly purge the gas compressor is the 
probable cause of the backfire because the compressor panel logic allows the purging 
process to occur with the starters engaged.  After engagement, the panel logic allowed 
ignition causing the backfire and subsequent explosion.  
 

  16 July 2017: During normal start-up operations, the reciprocating compressor ran for 

approximately five minutes without being loaded. The engine then shut down due to low 
fuel supply. Once corrected, the compressor was restarted without being purged or 
loaded. The engine ran in idle for about ten minutes with the blowdown valve in the open 

position. During that time, an explosion occurred causing damage to the 3rd stage cooler 
and associated piping.  
 
Initial investigation showed that a lack of understanding of the proper purging technique 
and an insufficient JSA with respect to listing and job steps are probable causes of the 
failure to purge the compressor.  
 

Therefore, BSEE recommends the following:  

  Review JSAs involving compressors to confirm that they include the steps associated with 

properly purging equipment before start-up.  
 

up procedures.  

  Review operating procedures to ensure purging operations are stated in compressor start-

  Review training program and work instructions to ensure personnel are aware of, and 

trained, in proper purging procedures.  

  Review compressor panel logic permissives to ensure the proper sequence of events in 

compressor start up. 
 

  Follow manufacturer’s recommendations for compressor maintenance.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

