 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, 
Regulation and Enforcement 
 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
(504) 736-2560 

BOEMRE 

Safety Alert No. 297 
29 September 2011 
 

Potable Water Pressure Tank Bladder Rupture 

 

 
Recently a platform’s fresh water system experienced low pressure due to the pressurized potable water 
pressure tank (WPT) being empty.  In an effort to find the problem, the fresh water pump switches were 
turned off, the system isolated and the water lines depressurized.  When the employee unthreaded a fitting 
located at the bottom of the WPT, the fitting was ejected out, causing severe facial injuries to the 
employee.    
 
 
A BOEMRE investigation revealed the following: 
 

 
	 
	  When the water system experienced low pressure, the WPT’s internal bladder maintained its 60 

 

psi manufacturer pre-charged pressure.      

 
	 
	  A Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was completed, but the JSA only included the task for changing the 
filters on the fresh water system.  The JSA should have included de-pressurizing the bladder prior 
to removal of the fitting. 

 

 
	 
	  There were no WPT manufacturer manual(s) located on the facility to access information needed 

to service the WPT in a safe manner. 

 
	 
	  The WPT manufacturer instructions state, “This tank is pre-pressurized and under no 

circumstances should the tank, fittings or connected system be disassembled prior to complete 
discharging of air and fluid pressure.” 

 
Therefore, the BOEMRE recommends Lessees and its contractors: 
  
 

 
	 
	  Continue to utilize the JSA process to review site-specific detailed job steps to uncover hazards, 

but the JSA should be performed for the specific job tasks being undertaken.  

 
	 
	  Do not install, operate or service a WPT if the manufacturer data manual(s) are not available.  

Failure to install, operate or service the WPT according to manufacturer’s recommendations may 
 
cause the tank to fail resulting in fatal injury or property damage.   

--BOEMRE--GOMR-- 
www.gomr.boemre.gov 
 

 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BOEMRE to inform the offshore oil and 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss.  It 
also contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of 
 
such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

