 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
BSEE 

 

U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and 
 
 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert No. 306 
 
19 March 2014 

 
Safety 
 
Alert 

Contact: Matt Nagy 
 
(504) 736-2828 

Trapped  Pressure Beneath  a  Tubing  Plug  Blows  Work  String  from  Well  

 

 

   

A lease operator was conducting a recompletion using both a coil tubing unit and a platform rig 
on an Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) platform. Upon completion of coil tubing operations, a 
 
DX pump through type tubing plug was set in the production tubing. Records indicated that at 
 
the time the plug was set, the fluid weight in the well was 12.7 pounds per gallon and that the 
 
well was static. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Upon re-entry of the well with the platform rig, several attempts were made to pump through the 
DX plug to ensure the well was indeed static.  During each attempt to pump, the pressure slowly 
bled off. The operator assumed that the pressure was going into the formation and that the well 
was in a static state.  An external cutter was then run, and the production tubing was cut below 
the DX plug.  Upon completion of the cut the tubing parted and unexpected pressure was 
released into the casing annulus.  The well began to flow and 807 feet of work string was blown 
from the well.  All personnel were mustered and the blowout preventer (BOP) was closed. No 
injuries were reported as a result of the incident and all personnel were accounted for. 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
An investigation by BSEE concluded that the following factors contributed to the accident: 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

•	   Wireline jet-cutter debris  and sand had accumulated on top of and inside the plug  body 
and the equalizing  sub-assembly  directly  beneath the plug.  The presence of  the debris 
and sand prevented the fluid from being  pumped through the plug and into the formation 
to kill the well.  

•	   The  wireline jet-cutter debris and sand made  it unlikely  that the equalizing ports on the  
plug  would open, thus preventing  the  identification of trapped pressure below the plug.  

•	   The lease operator made  the decision to cut the  tubing  below the plug with  some 


uncertainty  as to the presence of pressure trapped below the plug.
  

BSEE  recommends  the  following  when re-entering  existing  wells  when uncertainty  exists  about  
the possibility  of trapped pressure below previously set plugs:  

•	   Diagnostics   be   thoroughly   performed  on  wells   prior   to   re-entry   to   check  for   trapped 

pressures.  

•	   Operators develop operational procedures that  account  for   the   possibility   of   trapped 

pressure beneath previously  set plugs.  

•	   Consideration  of  using snubbing units  for  well  servicing when there  is  any doubt  as  to the  

presence of pressure below plugs of  any  type.  

 
—BSEE— 

 
www.bsee.gov 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and 
 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an 
incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

