 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 342 
25 October 2018 

 
 

 
 

Failure of Crane Hydraulic Boom Cylinders 

             
 

 

     Contact: Jason Mathews  
     Phone: (504) 731-1496 

 

 

 

       
                  26 March cylinder failure              
        

                              

                            25 April cylinder failure 

       

During 2018, two identical crane-failure incidents, both occurring while in operation, were 
reported on a platform in the Gulf of Mexico: 
 

•  26 March 2018: A hydraulic boom cylinder (HBC) installed on 3/24/18 on a 
platform crane was compromised when the cylinder rod separated from the 
cylinder rod eye. As a result, the cylinder dropped to the decking below. Because 
there are two cylinders on the crane, as shown above left, the failure did not cause 
the boom to collapse.  

 

•  25 April 2018: A replacement for the failed cylinder described above was installed 
on 4/1/18. On 4/25/18 the replacement cylinder suffered the same exact failure. In 
this instance, the replacement cylinder fell and hit a handrail, as shown above 
right.  

 
Both failed cylinders, and the remaining attached cylinder, were sent for inspection to a 
hydraulics/cylinder specialist. The inspection resulted in the following findings:  

• 

 
In the instances where the failures occurred, the pin-to-pin lengths of the cylinders 
involved were different. This was due to different rod lengths. 
 

•  This difference between cylinders working in tandem resulted in the shorter length 

cylinders experiencing stress at the rod pin coupling.  
 

•  This stress, in combination with an inferior weld, resulted in a failure of the rod pin 

coupling and rod connection. This failure resulted in the rod separating from the 
rod pin coupling, causing the cylinder to fall.  

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following:  
 

•  Ensure equivalent eye-to-eye rod length of HBCs when repair of one HBC is 

necessary.  

•  Review current crane cylinder configurations. 

•  Regardless of the manufacturer of the HBCs, BSEE recommends making the OEM 

of your crane boom aware of these failures, and further recommends that the 
operators obtain any needed replacement HBCs from the OEM, or a certified 
manufacturer.  

 

 

 

 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

