SAFETY ALERT 

Safety Alert No. 346 
25 January 2019   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
          

        Contact: Jason Mathews 

Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Fractures Found on Stainless Steel Fittings 

In November 2018, BSEE was notified of multiple fitting failures occurring on a Gulf of 
Mexico facility’s chemical injection skid that was recently placed in-service. The 
deficiencies observed consisted of cracks along various fitting bodies. These cracks can 
potentially lead to threatening high-pressure gas releases. Furthermore, unused Parker 
Hannifin IPD (Parker) 316 Stainless Steel (SS) MPITM fittings arrived at an offshore facility 
and were determined to be unsuitable for installation. Parker is currently reviewing the 
root cause(s) for these failures and establishing effective corrective actions. Although the 
primary type of fitting associated with these fractures has been identified as the Parker 
316SS MPITM, this has been an issue discovered on other manufacturer fittings 
throughout the Gulf of Mexico.             
      

             

                                       

          Cracked Fitting Previously In-Service   

                Cracked Fitting Sampled from Stock 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following options: 

· 

Identify the Parker 316SS MPITM fittings (as well as fittings of similar design) on your 
facilities and inspect for damage. If cracks or other deficiencies are detected, contact 
the manufacturer directly per Parker’s product quality alert. 

·  Schedule more frequent inspections of the equipment that utilize this type of fitting. 
Apply the fittings to your Quality Assurance / Mechanical Integrity system as a focal 
point for inspections.  

· 

Include the fittings for review within future facility hazard analyses (if applicable). 

-- BSEE -- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.

