SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 336      
4 June 2018  
 

 

                               
 

 

 

  Contact: Jason Mathews  

            Phone: (504) 731-1496 

 

 
 

Recurring Hand Injury Incidents on the OCS 

 

 
On April 12, 2018, a crane was used to lift a full super sack of trash from a trash storage 
container. The crane operator was unable to see the actual lifting due to a blind spot area 
but was being directed by a designated crane signalman.  
 
During the slow lifting process to remove the trash bag from the storage container, 
the container also began to lift.  The employee who was signaling the crane operator 
placed his hand on the trash bag container to free the bag. Subsequently, the storage 
container’s metal frame parted causing the container to fall onto the production deck and 
the employee on the backside of his left hand causing a laceration (image above) which 
required 8 stitches. The trash storage container was removed from service and discarded. 
Hand protection (gloves) was not being used during the performance of the job task. 
 
In addition to the above hand injury, BSEE has received eight additional reports of hand 
injuries this year: 
 

January 17: A worker was in the process of cleaning debris from the charge pump 
suction strainer on a mud pump and sustained a laceration to the right index finger. 

February 1: A worker was assisting with cutting a floor mat and sustained a 
laceration of the left thumb. 

February 12: While loading a work basket, a worker sustained an injury to the left 
ring finger. 

March 7: A worker sustained a laceration to his thumb while assisting in the take 
down of a chiksan line.  

 

 

 
 

March 14: While rigging up wire-line equipment, a worker sustained a serious 
injury to his hand and fingers when the man-rider hoisting cable pulled his hand 
into a sheave.  

March 21: While the contract company was constructing a derrick, a worker 
sustained a finger injury when his hand slipped from a wrench taking off the top 
part of his finger and exposing the bone.  

March 23: While changing a mechanical seal on a mud pump, the worker’s hand 
slipped under the impeller; sustaining a laceration to the top of his hand requiring 
sutures. 

April 11: A worker sustained 1st and 2nd degree burns to his hands and face from 
a flash fire when starting a crane engine with a gas-driven starter.  
 

A review of the injury reports reveals that the types of injuries include burns, cuts and 
blunt trauma.  
 
Due to the frequency in which hand injuries are occurring on the OCS, BSEE 
recommends that operators ensure that Job Safety Analyses, as required by 30 CFR 
250.1911, properly identify the risks for the hazards that workers are exposed to and that 
special attention is given to mitigate the risks to as low as reasonably practicable 
(ALARP) using the hierarchy of controls promoted by NIOSH. 
 

 
Additionally, BSEE recommends that offshore personnel always wear appropriate hand 
protection during the performance of their job task. 

 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.  
 

