 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

BSEE 

U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Safety and 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 

Safety Alert No. 310 
19 March 2014 

Safety 
Alert 

Contact: Matt Nagy 
(504) 736-2828 

Hydraulic Workover Unit Toppled by Waterspout 

While conducting workover operations, a Hydraulic Workover (HWO) unit was toppled by 
strong winds caused by a waterspout that touched down near the platform. The result was the 
entire HWO unit collapsing onto the facility, as well as into offshore waters. The collapse 
resulted in damage to the lower riser portion of the HWO unit as well as to several other pieces 
of well servicing equipment located on the platform.  The upper riser portion and the BOP stack 
of the HWO unit fell into the water resulting in total loss of the BOP stack.  All personnel had 
been moved from the platform to the supporting lift boat prior to the collapse, and no fatalities or 
injuries resulted from the incident. 

An investigation by BSEE concluded the following factors contributed to the accident: 

•  High wind loading was exerted on the unit as a result of the waterspout being so near to 
the facility. The large surface area presented by the HWO unit, against which the wind 
could act, and the close proximity of the waterspout resulted in a high wind loading being 
exerted on the unit. 

•  The small deck area of the platform caused an increase in the angle(s) of the guy lines 

used to support the HWO unit. This increase in angle(s) resulted in diminished stability 
of the HWO unit during the high wind conditions caused by the waterspout. 

• 

Installation of additional guy lines would have helped to compensate for the increased 
angle(s) in the guy lines, thus increasing stability and support for the HWO unit in the 
event of increased wind loading due to the storm, or swaying due to high sea state and 
possible sway in the platform. 

BSEE recommends the following when installing guy lines to support HWO or related well 
servicing equipment: 

•  Engineering calculations be performed to determine the correct angle(s) for the guy lines 

when installing HWO, or related well service equipment. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

• 

Installation of additional guy lines when deck space on the host platform is limited and 
guy line angle(s) increases. 

•  Seasonal weather patterns be taken into consideration when installing guy lines and other 

means of support. 

•  Guidelines for construction, safety factor, and storm load for wire rope guy lines found in 

API Spec 4F, Section 8.1.2 and 8.1.3 be followed when selecting wire rope used for the 
purpose of guy lines. 

—BSEE— 

www.bsee.gov 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such an 
incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

