 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT 
 

Safety Alert No. 350 
3 May 2019 

 

 
 

 
 

 

                     Contact: Jason Mathews 
       

           Phone: (504) 731-1496 

Fires on Facilities Caused by Use of Outdoor Grills 

 

Outdoor grill from 12 January 2019 incident (left). Cellar Deck (circled) from 12 January 2019 incident. 

 
During  the  first few  months  of  2019,  two  fires  have  occurred  related  to facility  barbecue 
grills  being  operated  outside  of  living  quarters.  Causal  factors  include  inadequate 
containment and improper disposal of hot grill debris. These factors could have resulted in 
fires  of  greater  magnitude  and  severity  if  swift  emergency  response  measures  were  not 
initiated at the time of the incidents.  
 
During one incident, on 12 January 2019, personnel witnessed a waste bag on fire on a 
facility’s cellar deck. The crew responded with the use of dry chemical extinguishers and a 
water hose, which extinguished the fire. There were no personnel injuries and no damage 
to equipment. The scene of the fire occurred directly below the south side of the main deck, 
where the designated smoking area is located. This section of the main deck also has an 
outdoor grill available for use. Investigators concluded that hot charcoal or grease exiting 
the grill’s drain line was carried by high winds through the open grating to the deck below. 
The charcoal or grease landed on the waste bag, resulting in the fire.  
 
During the second incident, on 2 February 2019, a small fire was observed in a different 
facility’s trash compactor. The Offshore Installation Manager activated the facility 
Emergency Shutdown, and all personnel were instructed to muster. The fire team 
immediately extinguished the flame. There were no personnel injuries and no damage to 
equipment. The investigation team concluded that the disposal of used grilling charcoal 
into the trash compactor was the catalyst for the subsequent fire. 
 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 

•  Verify that all appropriate personnel are aware of established policies for the proper 

• 

disposal of used barbeque charcoal. 
 
In areas where grills are used, install barriers (e.g., a section of solid decking, catch 
trays, buckets) over open grating in order to prevent hot grill debris from reaching 
the production deck or cellar deck, where potential ignition sources are prevalent. 

•  Verify all safety precautions and hazard mitigations are in place prior to beginning to 

cook on an outdoor grill. 

•  Prior to disposal of spent charcoal, measures should be taken to ensure the heat 

energy has been extinguished. 

•  Consider installing solid decking as an additional preventative measure within your 

designated smoking area to avoid ash from falling to an undesirable location and 
periodically review designated smoking area requirements with facility personnel. 

 

 

-- BSEE-- 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 

