www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

What happens when the lights go out?

www.iomosaic.com

January 2012

This issue sponsored by

A maintenance worker went into the 
electrical room to shut off a non-process 
circuit. By mistake, he turned off the circuit 
breaker for the plant programmable logic 
controller (PLC ) power. He realized his error, 
reset the PLC circuit breaker and turned off 
the intended circuit breaker. The short power 
interruption to the PLC caused some process 
equipment to stop while other equipment 
continued to operate. The result was a process 
trying to run with partial controls. The process 
operation was upset, isolation valves closed, 
and toxic material was vented  at a rate that 
overloaded a vent scrubber. Fortunately, no 
one was injured and the release did not leave 
the plant site.

Why did this happen?

 We do not know how well the individual 
breakers were labeled, or how well the 
electrician was trained. In a process hazard 
analysis (PHA), this type of failure should be 
considered when discussing human factors. 
Unfortunately, the potential consequences of a 
small event such as this may be missed in the 
scope of a PHA. 
 When doing a PHA, be sure that you know 
what happens to instruments, valves, and other 
equipment in case of failure of electric power or 
other utilities such as instrument air. Do they 
move to a “fail-safe” position or remain in their 
last position?  If you are not sure, follow the 
rule: “when in doubt, check it out”.
 Knowing the failure state of a single device 
may not be enough to understand what happens 
to a process if a large number of devices move 
to the failure position at the same time. Think 
about what happens if a lot of equipment loses 
power at the same time.

What can you do?

 Know what happens if the power fails for a single piece 
of equipment, or to a part of the plant, but the rest of the 
equipment continues to operate. What happens if power is 
lost to computer displays or the control panel, but not to the 
process?
 Ensure that all electrical controls, including electrical 
panels and circuit breakers, are properly and clearly labeled. 
At home you may be able to flip a few circuit breakers until 
you get the right one, but not at work!
 If you are asked by a PHA team to verify the proper 
operation of a device or procedure, take that task seriously. 
Follow the test procedure and document what you observe.
 When power failures occur, follow emergency 
procedures. These should tell you what actions are needed 
to keep the plant safe, and how to safely resume operation 
following a power failure.
 Review and practice utility failure procedures 
periodically and correct any problems or omissions. 
Confirm that you  will be able to find the emergency 
procedures in the event of a power failure.

Be prepared for utility failures!

AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

