 What can you do?Air is always all around us, and the oxygen it contains is necessary for life. But, compressed air(or any other compressed gas) contains a lot of energy and can cause major damage in case of a vessel or pipe failure. The pictures show the consequences of three explosions resulting from failure during pneumatic pressure testing of pipes and vessels.1.A flange failed while pressure testing a 36 inch (~1 meter) diameter pipe at about 1,800 psig (12.41 MPa, or ~125 bar) compressed air pressure. One person was killed, 15 injured, and there was significant damage to the equipment.2.Pipes connected to a tank were pressure tested using compressed air. The tank was isolated from the pipes by closing valves, and there was no blind or other positive isolation. A valve leaked allowing air to pressurize the tank. It took off like a rocket and landed on top of the process rack! (See the October 2007 Beacon)3.In this incident, the compressed gas was nitrogen (not air), but the consequences of the explosion are similar. A pipeline failed during the compressed nitrogen pressure test, killing one worker and seriously injuring three others.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThink about what could happen if your equipment fails to pass the pressure test!AIChE © 2013. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Air Power!The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsSeptember 2013This issue sponsored byWhenever possible, pressure test equipment using water (hydrostatic test) or another non-hazardous liquid. Water is a non-compressible fluid, and water at a given pressure contains a lot less energy than a compressed gas such as air. Think about the difference in the sound of bursting a balloon filled with water compared to one filled with air. The air filled balloon ﬁpopsﬂ, but the water filled balloon does not make much noise.Before you start a pressure test, think about the consequences if a failure occurs. Take precautions so that people are not at risk during the test. Remember that it is a test Œwhat happens if the equipment fails the test?www.acutech-consulting.com321Do not rely on valves only to isolate equipment being tested from other equipment that is not strong enough to withstand the test pressure. Provide positive isolation with blinds or physical disconnection of piping.Use an approved written pressure testing procedure, and follow it rigorously. Post warning signs and restrict access to places where pressure testing is being done. Make sure that people who are not directly involved in the test are not allowed in the area for any reason.If you must use pressurized gas for a test, do a thorough safety review before conducting the test.