 Do you know?ŁSome steels and other metals can become brittle when exposed to very low temperatures.ŁCold embrittlement can result in failure of process equipment such as vessels, heat exchangers, or piping. This failure can be rapid and catastrophic, resulting in release of a large amount material.ŁIntroduction of hot material into a cold pipe, vessel, or other process equipment causes stress because of the temperature gradient, and this stress may be sufficient to cause equipment damage, or even failure of the equipment.A pump which supplied hot oil to a heat exchanger in a gas processing plant stopped for several hours. With no flow of hot oil to the exchanger, the temperature in the heat exchanger, normally 100 degrees C (212 degrees F) or higher, dropped to 48 degrees below zero C (54 degrees below zero F). Ice was observed on the outside of the heat exchanger. The hot oil pump was re-started, and hot oil flow resumed to the heat exchanger. The low temperature had caused the steel heat exchanger toKnow the temperature capability of your plant Œboth high and low!ŁKnow the design temperature range of the equipment in your plant Œboth the high and the low temperature limits for safe operation.ŁKnow if you have any equipment in your plant which might be subject to cold embrittlement.ŁUnderstand and follow all procedures which are required to ensure that equipment is not ex-posed to excessively high or low temperatures, or to excessive temperature gradients which might stress and damage the equipment.ŁLearn more about this incident by searching the Internet for ﬁ1998 Esso Longford gas explosionﬂ.November 2007AIChE ©2007. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319Cold Embrittlement and Thermal StressSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersWhat You Can Dohttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.become brittle, and the 150 C temperature differential from the sudden flow of hot oil caused additional stress. This resulted in a brittle fracture of the heat exchanger. A vapor cloud estimated to contain more than 10 tons of flammable gas was released, and subsequently ignited by a heater. The explosion and fires killed 2 workers, injured 8 others, and the fire burned for 2 days. The gas supply to a large part of Australia was disrupted for nearly 3 weeks, impacting the lives of an estimated 4 million people. Total economic loss was estimated at over 1 billion Australian dollars.PSID Members see "Free Search--Embrittlement"