 This Beacon is not focused on a single incident, but on incidents that continue to occur across industry Œnitrogen asphyxiation. A June 2003 United States Chemical Safety Board (CSB) bulletin reported nitrogen asphyxiation incidents in US industry resulting in 80 deaths from 1992 to 2002. These incidents occurred in many different workplaces Œindustrialplants, laboratories, and medical facilities. Many of the incidents involved contractors. The pictures are some examples of the kind of places where a dangerous concentration of nitrogen could accumulate, taken from CSB reports.While nitrogen itself is not toxic, a high nitrogen concentration in the air you breathe will starve your body of the oxygen needed to sustain life. 78% of the air we normally breathe is nitrogen, and oxygen makes up most of the rest. People cannot function well when the nitrogen concentration is more than 84% (16% oxygen). Your judgment may be impaired and you may not recognize that you are in danger! At 94% nitrogen concentration, death is likelyin a few breaths.On the positive side, nitrogen is an inert gas which reduces fire potential by eliminating the oxygen required for a fire. For this reason nitrogen is commonly used to purge piping and equipment used in flammable material service. http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelBe aware of nitrogen and other inert gas hazards!AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Nitrogen ŒHazard and Safeguard!This issue sponsored byThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, and Vietnamese.www.fauske.comwww.aiche.org/ccpsJune 2012What can you do?Know where nitrogen gas is vented. It should be outdoors or to a system designed to safely receive nitrogen. Where nitrogen is used, consider monitoring the oxygen concentration in the area to ensure it does not drop below safe levels.Know where nitrogen is used in your plant, and make sure that all nitrogen pipes are clearly labeled.Inspect hoses used in nitrogen service as you would any hose containingtoxic gas. Do not use a hose found to be leaking. Never assume the oxygen concentration in a vessel or any other confined space is acceptable. Always measure it before working near a vessel opening or inside any confined space.Make sure that the ventilation systems in your plant are working correctly. They are not just for comfort Œthey also remove potentially hazardous air contaminants.Recognize that a confined space can be created by temporary obstructions such as plastic or canvas tarps or other temporary weather protection enclosures.Read the US Chemical Safety Board bulletin on nitrogen asphyxiation, available from www.csb.gov.Effects of Oxygen Deficiency on the Human Body *% OxygenEffect20.9Normal19.5Legal minimum concentration for humans (US OSHA)15Œ19.5Decreased ability to work; early symptoms in persons with heart, lung, or circulatory problems12Œ15Increased pulse rate and respiration, impaired judgment10Œ12Further increase in pulse and respiration, giddiness, poor judgment, blue lips8Œ10Mental failure, nausea, fainting, vomiting, unconsciousness6Œ88 minutes -100% fatalities; 6 minutes -50% fatalitiesLessthan 6Coma in 40 seconds, convulsions, breathing stops, death* P. Yanisko and D.Kroll, ﬁUse Nitrogen Safelyﬂ, Chemical Engineering Progress, March 2012, p. 44-48..