 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelOctober 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and Spansh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and SpanishishHere™s What HappenedHere™s What HappenedHow Did This Happen ?How Did This Happen ?CCPS Welcomes CCPS Welcomes CEC Combustion CEC Combustion Services Group as Services Group as a New Membera New MemberThis foundry suffered a natural gas explosion that resulted in three fatalities, six hospitalizations, and $30 million US in damages. The portion of the facility where the explosion occurred was completely destroyed. One of the fatalities occurred at the time of the initial explosion, but twoAlthough the facility handles both propane and natural gas, evidence suggests that an undetected natural gas leak slowly supplied gas to a confined space. It reached an explosive level and found an ignition source.There were several warning, or near-misses, before the explosion. Twice the preceding week, gas odors had been detected. In the first incident, the leak source was never found and the odor was blamed on wind blowing the gas ﬁsmellﬂ into the building from outside. The second near-miss resulted in a plant evacuation and occurred because a tank outside of the building leaked gas into a pipe that opened in the building. Both incidents contributed to a desensitization of the hazards of natural gas. Don™t Ignore Even Small Fuel Leaks. TestTestSuspicious Atmospheres.Did You Know?Did You Know?ŁNot all natural gas or Propane is odorized. Usually a mercaptan is added as the odorant.ŁThe lower explosive limit for natural gas is only 4.3% by volume in air. It takes very little to get in to the explosive range.ŁNot all flammable vapors behave the same. Usually, natural gas and hydrogen are lighter than air and may accumulate in high spaces. Propane is heavier than air and flows along the ground like a river of vapor that pools in low spots.What You Can DoWhat You Can DoŁALL gas leaks are dangerous! Even very small leaks can supply enough fuel to cause a destructive explosion. Report, find and correct every gas leak.ŁIf you smell gas, SAFELYevacuate the area. Do not turn on lights or equipment that might supply an ignition source. Stop all hot work IMMEDIATELY!ŁTo stop a leak, be aware that closing valves or shutting down equipment may provide an ignition source. Know where remote shut off valves and switches are and use them.ŁWhen you test for explosive atmospheres be sure to use the right type of test equipment that is calibrated according to manufacturer™s recommendations and specifications.ŁOnce the leak is controlled, ventilate confined spaces carefully!When you ventilate a fuel rich atmosphere, it will pass through the explosive range and any ignition source will cause an explosion.others were caused by a collapsing building. Evacuation from buildings in the facility and emergency response efforts were hampered by acrid smoke and a broken water main.Photographs and incident description supplied by CEC Combustion Services Group: http://www.combustionsafety.comGas Leak Destroys PlantGas Leak Destroys PlantPSID Members see Free Search: Natural Gas