 ŁYou might think that an incident that occurred over 80 years ago is not relevant to today™s industry. But, we still have catastrophic failures of storage tanks today (see pictures below), and for similar reasons.ŁA large quantity of any liquid, even a non-hazardous material such as molasses or water, can be dangerous if rapidly released in large quantities, simply because of its volume and mass.On January 15, 1919, people in north Boston, Massachusetts hearda loud rumbling noise and watched in horror as a 50 foot (15 m) high tank containing 2.3 million US gallons (8700 cubic meters) of molasses suddenly broke apart, releasing its contents into the city. A wave of molasses over 15 feet (5 m) high and 160 feet (50 m) wide surgedthrough the streets. How slow is molasses in January? This wave traveled at an estimated speed of 35 miles per hour (60 km/hour)for more than 2 city blocks. 21 people were killed, over 150 injured, and the damage estimate was equivalent to over 100 million US dollars in today™s currency.What caused this catastrophic tank failure? Some of the causes identified by the investigation included:ŁThe tank was not properly inspected during construction.ŁThe tank was not tested after construction and before filling it with molasses.ŁThe tank had been observed to be leaking at the welds between the tank™s steel plates before the failure, but no action had been taken.Remember the lessons of the past!ŁIf you observe leakage, corrosion, or other indication of potential failure in a storage tank, report it immediately to management. ŁMake sure that any new tank, or one being returned to service following repair or inactivity, is properly inspected and testedbefore filling.ŁEnsure you know the operating capacities of your tanks and double check the level before filling.ŁDon™t throw out your old incident reports. Read them again, and remember the lessons. We can learn a lot from things that happened a long time ago.May 2007AIChE ©2007. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319The Great Boston Molasses Flood of 1919Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersDo you know?What You Can Dohttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.and Thai.Before AfterJanuary 2000 ŒCincinnati, Ohio, USA, tank failure releases 365,000 gallons (1400 cu. m) of fertilizer solution into the Ohio River.January 1988 ŒFloreffe, Pennsylvania, USA, tank failure releases over 4 million US gallons (15,000 cu. m) of diesel oil into the Monongahela River.