 January 1986, Space Shuttle Challengerexplodes during launchA good safety culture depends on everyone!June 2007AIChE ©2007. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319Process Safety CultureSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersWhat You Can Do?http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.and Thai.What do these incidents, which were all major failures of complex technical systems, have in common? In all of them, the incident investigations identified problems in the organization™s ﬁsafety cultureﬂas an important contributing factor. But, what is ﬁsafety cultureﬂ? The United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive defines safety culture as ﬁ... the product of the individual and group values, attitudes, competencies and patterns of behavior that determine the commitment to, and the style and proficiency of, an organization's health and safety programs.ﬂIt sounds pretty complicated, and CCPS suggests a simpler definition: ﬁSafety culture is how the organization behaves when no one is watching.ﬂWhile management has a key leadership role in establishing a good safety culture in an organization, everybody must contribute. In this Beacon, we will focus on one important aspect of safety culture Œmaintaining a sense of vulnerabilityŒand cover others in future issues.Since catastrophic accidents are not very common, it is easy to begin to believe that nothing bad can happen. People can become complacent, and have afalse sense of security. Good operations can be compromised. Critical protective systems and procedures may not be maintained, or may be changed without proper understanding of the possible consequences. Eliminating serious incidents requires constant attention to the potentially catastrophic results of hazardous activities.February 2003, Space Shuttle Columbiabreaks up during re-entryJuly 1988, Piper Alpha Oil Platform destroyed by fire and explosionJune 1974, Flixborough, England chemical plant explosionMarch 2005, Texas City, Texas oil refinery explosionŁBe vigilant about the hazards of the materials and processes inyour plant.ŁRecognize ﬁnear missﬂevents to remind you of what could have gone wrong. ŁUse incidents which occur in other facilities, such as the incidents reported in the Beacon, to remind you of the possibility of similar problems at your plant.ŁAlways operate within safe operating limits, and established operating procedures. When this isn™t possible, notify your supervision immediately.ŁUse approved procedures for authorizing changes to established procedures, including thorough risk evaluation and approval by knowledgeable authorities.