 CCPCCPAn AIChE IndustryAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceTechnology AllianceSponsored Sponsored by by AIChEAIChEPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelAugust 2003Here™s What Happened:This picture shows what can happen if the hazards of reactive chemistry are not recognized. A worker was preparing a solution for use and accidentally mixed two incompatible chemicals in a small bucket. A violent exothermic chemical reaction began immediately and generated enough heatheatto boil the material. The hot mixture spewed out of the bucket and splashed on the worker causing serious burns to several parts of his body.In the case described above, the worker was the only one injured, but if a similar uncontrolled reaction had taken place in a vessel, what would the result have been?Mixing Chemicals can have unexpected consequences. Caution, CautMixing Chemicals can have unexpected consequences. Caution, Caution, Caution!ion, Caution!Why did this Happen?The incident investigation revealed that:ŁThe worker had no idea that mixing these two chemicals would result in such a violent reaction.ŁA general understanding of the possible consequences was not present.ŁAppropriate hazard controls and procedures were not fully implemented.Be Aware!!!Many materials react with each otherŠand sometimes very violently! By-products of these reactions may include heat (sometimes enough to cause rapid violent boiling) and the formation of other materials that might be very corrosive or toxic.PSID MembersŠlook in Free SearchŠKey word: ﬁReactiveﬂSimply Mixing Chemicals––can be Hazardous to your HealthSSCENTER FOR CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYCHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYReactive Chemistry: What You Can Do to be SafeReactive Chemistry: What You Can Do to be Safe(Sources: CCPS Safety Alert,CCPS Safety Alert,Reactive Material HazardsReactive Material Hazardsand, Essential Practices for Managing Chemical Reactivity HazardsEssential Practices for Managing Chemical Reactivity Hazards)If unsureŠDON™T mix!DON™T mix!Get confirmation.Always get changes approved beforemaking them.Read the currentMSDS for all new chemicals and review the process safety information for consequences of inadvertent mixing.When mixing chemicals, make certain that you are mixing the chemicals intended. Check and recheck the labels and warnings.When mixing chemicals in an open container, make sure that you are wearing the right PPE.If your area has a chemical interaction matrix, make sure you read and understand it.Read the CCPS publication, Reactive Material Hazards (http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetyalerts.htm) Photo source: Navy Safety Center web siteAIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps@aiche.orgor 212-591-73This edition is also available in German. Contact Adrian Sepedaat adrian_l@swbell.netfor a copy.