This issue sponsored by

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

http://www.dekra-process-safety.com/

What if that “wrong” instrument reading is correct?

April 2019

An explosion at a large US chemical manufacturing site caused 16 fatalities and more than 300 injuries. 

There were significant property damage and business interruption losses as well. The explosion occurred 
during startup of a distillation column. It is believed that the trays in the column were damaged early in the 
startup. The tray damage caused poor separation. There was an abnormally high nitrobenzene concentration in 
the bottom of the column – a concentration which was unstable.

There are many lessons from this incident (see references). This Beacon focuses on one – a “bad” 

Before

temperature indication in the distillation column. Hours before the explosion, the column was put on total 
reflux because of startup difficulties. Later, a control system technician was asked to replace a thermocouple 
on a tray in the column below the feed tray. The reason – it was reading 121°C when it “should have been 
reading 102 °C.” The conclusion at the time was that the thermocouple had failed. In hindsight, the
thermocouple was probably 
reading correctly. Computer 
modeling of the column, 
done many years after the 
incident and assuming 
damage to the trays in the 
bottom of the column, 
predicted increased 
nitrobenzene concentration. 
This would account for the 
observed temperature of 
121°C.

Plant location

After

What Can You Do?

How often do we dismiss readings that are not normal as “erroneous?” While this may be the case, shouldn’t 

we first assume that the instrument is reading correctly? Then, try to understand why the reading is not normal.
 Use other process instruments and related information to perform a more comprehensive assessment of what 

is happening in your process.

 What else can you do to understand if the instrument is failed or correct? For example, can you take a process 

sample for analysis to help understand the situation? Can you look at local temperature or pressure gages in 
the field? Can you look through a sight glass on top of a tank to see the level?

 Get help from your co-workers, supervisors, and engineering support.
 Ask “What are the possible consequences if this reading is correct?” Asking the question may lead to reviews 

that could uncover unexpected hazards.

 If the “erroneous” reading warns of a significant threat, work with your supervisors and technical support 

engineers. Understand what action you should be taking to prevent a possible incident if it turns out that the 
instrument reading is correct.

 In a good process safety culture, everybody should believe instruments, unless a thorough assessment 

indicates that an instrument reading is wrong.

References:   Process Safety Progress 23 (3), September 2004, pp. 221–228, and  Process Safety Progress 35 (1), March 2016, pp. 103–106.

Think about what an “abnormal” instrument reading could mean!

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

