 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored by AIChEPProcess SSafety BBeaconMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJuly 2003Here™s What Happened:By design, plastic beads fall by gravity through this sieve. The beads contain trace amounts of pentane, a flammable, volatile material which is liberated during processing. The sieve was designed with an air sweep to keep the pentane fume concentration below the flammable limit. One evening, when everything appeared to be operating as it should, the operators heard a loud BANG!BANG!They quickly investigated and saw flames coming out of the sieve. Quick action by the fire brigade controlled the fire and no one was injured, but the plant was down forrepairs.AIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.Contact us atccps@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319.http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmCritical Safety Devices come in many forms. Know them and use tCritical Safety Devices come in many forms. Know them and use them!hem!What Can You Do to Prevent Similar Problems?Regularly check ALLsafe guards to be sure that they are still in place and working properly. This includes interlocksŠare they there, are they working? Remember, air purges can be safeguards too.Be aware that static electricity may be anywhere. Good design and well maintained systems control it.Some equipment has grounding cables. If they are damaged, replace them quickly to remove the ﬁsparkﬂ potential.Make sure that all three components of the fire triangle do not exist at one time and in one place.How Could this have Happened?ŁPlastic beads falling through air generate an electrical charge. When this charge is large enough, it discharges. This is a static electrical spark!!This is a static electrical spark!!ŁThese beads contained trace amounts of pentane, a volatile flammable material. As the beads fell, some of the pentane vaporized and made the atmosphere flammable.ŁThe air purge that was suppose to sweep the flammables out of the sieve was not working properly. This critical safety system failedŠtoo little air flow allowed a flammable atmosphere to develop!ŁThe purge air flow system was not interlocked to the sieve operation so no alarm sounded at low air flow.ŁAnd, as we all know--a spark in a flammable atmosphere = KABOOM!!!KABOOM!!!PSID MembersŠcheck for ﬁStaticﬂ in the free search area.Static Electricity + Flammables + Air = ??You Guessed itŒExplosion & Fire !SCENTER FOR CEHMICAL PROCESS SAFETYThis is a picture of a sieve covered in soot after static electricity sparked an explosion.Sieve traysSoot and flame damage