 ŁBefore starting any excavation operation, ask if anyone has verified the location of underground pipes, electrical cables, or other critical or hazardous items in the area to be excavated. This should be a part of your facility™s excavation permit program.ŁConduct safety reviews before any construction activities.ŁReport any near misses in excavation activities Œpipes found where none were expected, or in a different location than expected.ŁLearn the location of any hazardous pipelines which go through your facilities, and how to respond if there is a leak for any reason.ŁIf you are digging in the area of any pipelines or other hazardous facilities, make sure you understand and are trained in appropriate emergency procedures.A construction crew was installing a new underground water pipe. While digging, the excavation equipment accidently struck and punctureda pipeline carrying gasoline. The leakingvapors were ignited causing a serious explosion and fire which killed five construction workers, seriously injured four others, required evacuation of people within ½mile (0.9 Km) of the incident site, severely damaged a nearby house, and caused other property damage. A primary cause of the incident was that the exact location of the gasoline pipe was not known by the excavation workers. They were following markings on the ground made by the pipeline company, which were different from the engineering plans. The engineering drawingsshowed the pipe curving out around the trunk of a tree, which had been cut down after the pipeline was built. Workers and supervisors did not visually verify the pipe location using hand tools as required by good practice.Know what is underground before you dig!This incident occurred in a trans-portation pipeline in a community, butthere are similar hazards in many chemical, refining, or other manufacturing facilities. Many plants have underground pipelines carrying hazardous materials. These may be the plant™s own pipelines, or pipelines passing through the plant site which are owned and operated by somebody else Œa pipeline company, a neighboring plant, or the local natural gas company.April 2008AIChE ©2008. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319Gasoline pipeline damaged by construction causes fireSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersDo you know?http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.CCPS PSID members ŒUse Free Search ŒﬁpipelineﬂCourtesy of Creative Commons ShareAlike1.0 License:http://creativecommons.org/licenses/sa/1.0/Courtesy of CalOSHA