 Look Through the Camouflage and IDENTIFY your Hidden Hazards!Look Through the Camouflage and IDENTIFY your Hidden Hazards!CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceCCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AlliancePProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelOctober 2004CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2004. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSSponsored by CCPSSupportersAvailable When Needed???A visible Hidden Hazard! We don™t know where this picture is from, but we thought it could be used to convey an important message. Sometimes hazards are right in front of us and we fail to see them for what they are– because they are so obvious!In this case, it would be impossible to:1) Get to the valve quickly, and 2) Operate the valve in an emergency.As you go about your daily duties, think about this picture and look for similar ﬁvisibleﬂ hidden hazards in your facility.ŁA chain ANDtwo branchesprevent this valve from being operated. The valve and handle are painted red which lead us to believe it™s part of a fire water systemŠusually a pretty important system in an emergency. This valve won™t be easy to access in an emergency and its pretty obvious it hasn™t been turned in YEARS! This facility must not have a program to test emergency systems regularly. What would you do if your job was to open or close this valve?ŁThis is an excellent example of an emergency system that is NOT operable. Your facility may have valves or other equipment that are even more inaccessible. You don™t notice them because they are used infrequently and tend to be forgotten---until they are needed. Where do they exist in your facility?ŁBeing able to access and operate critical pieces of equipment is essential in today™s process and manufacturing operations in all industries. It doesn™t matter if it is a valve, electrical pushbutton, or just having a clear line of sight to a field temperature or pressure gage. If you can™t get to it and use it as intended when needed, it is a hazardŠsometimes a visibleHidden Hazard. Do you have any of these visible Hidden Hazards in your workplace?ŁThe next time you come across a situation where access is difficult, or you have concerns regarding operability of equipment in your facility, discuss it with your supervisor or department / area safety committee.This edition is also available in German, French, Spanish, Portuguese and Chinese. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.