www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Hidden hazards!

This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

August 2019

Some hazards are more obvious than 
others. We all respect a sharp knife, 
knowing the potential for a serious cut. 

The same can be said about a drum of 
hazardous material that has the appropriate 
labels. However, it is difficult to determine 
if a pipe or vessel is full or empty, 
pressurized or not. It is even more difficult 
to understand the hazards associated with 
all of the materials and energies handled in 
your manufacturing process. 

In a plant that was being dismantled, an unmarked and not even documented part of piping was 
found to contain sulfuric acid, which injured an employee.

So, what should we do? We need to treat them all as if the worst situation is present until better 
information can be obtained.

Did You Know?

What Can You Do?

Why is this important? You can only 

manage hazards that you see and 
recognize. Chemical or petrochemical 
plants do not have many moving parts to 
show activity. This means hazards need to 
be identified, understood, and systems put 
in place to manage their safety.

Knowing the hazards is especially 

important when pipes or vessels are to  be 
opened. Without a good understanding of 
what is or was in the process equipment, 
and what the temperatures and pressures 
are, preparing for the task is difficult, and 
the work can be dangerous. 

 Know your process and what is in each part of 

equipment. For reactive systems, this could change with 
time.

 Verify that pipe and equipment labeling is accurate and 

clearly visible/readable.

 When equipment changes service either with different 
batches or after it has been changed physically, ensure 
proper review using your Management of Change 
(MOC) processes, and consider the need to update 
equipment labeling .

 Follow line-breaking, vessel-opening and Lockout 

Tagout (LOTO) procedures.

 When preparing systems for these activities, be diligent 

about completing the required permits. If there is an 
unclear or unresolved issue, stop and ask someone to 
review the situation before proceeding. Many incidents 
(see Beacon of June 2018) have been caused by poor 
permitting practices. 

Hazard Identification – the first step for process safety!

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, 

Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

