www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.dekra.us/process-safety

Plugged line & equipment – More than a nuisance

September 2019

This issue sponsored by

The CSB investigated an incident where a process 
upset plugged the vent (Fig. 1) and the relief 
device on the waste surge tank.  When the 
maintenance personnel came to open the surge 
tank to clean-out the surge tank, residual pressure 
blew the heavy cover off (Fig. 2), killing all 3 of 
them. Why did this happen?

Why did the maintenance people open the tank 
while it was under pressure? During the start-up 
the process had diverted off-spec product to the 
surge tank that released gas, and fouling of the vent 
had increased pressure in the tank. The pressure 
indicator (gauge) was also plugged and did not 
register any pressure. 

Fig. 1 Plugged vent line

Did you know?

What can you do?

Fig. 2 Blown-off lid 

 Plugged lines and equipment are a nuisance; 

clearing them safely can be a lot of messy 
work. Plugged lines and equipment can be 
connected with and  indicate another major 
issue – blocked key instrumentation or relief 
devices. 

 Many things can cause plugging, higher 
melting materials, solids in the process 
stream or corrosion products. Unplugging 
equipment needs proper isolation before 
starting any line/equipment opening. 
(LOTO). 

 A procedure should exist or be created to list 

the corrects steps and methods before 
starting clearing the lines.

 Plugged lines and equipment are indicators 
of other problems – a process upset, excess 
corrosion, etc. Report plugging even if a 
minor process problem occurs. 

 Frequently plugged lines or equipment 

need to be investigated to avoid upsets and 
problems with clearing them.

 Before clearing lines or equipment stop to 

review how the work will proceed and 
what other hazards could be present 
creating exposure during clearing. 

When equipment plugs, it may be a warning that other equipment is plugged too

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

