www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Mechanical Integrity – The Bolts Are Too Short!

February 2012

This issue sponsored by

…or they aren’t all there!

The pictures show improperly bolted flanges that a 

plant found during safety inspections. In the top 
pictures, some or all of the bolts are too short, and the 
nuts are not completely on the bolts. This means that 
the joint may not be as strong as it should be. Flanges 
are designed so that the entire nut-bolt combination 
holds the forces on the flange. If the nut is only 
partially screwed onto the bolt, the connection may 
not be strong enough.

In the picture to the left, two of the four bolts are 
missing. This flange will only be about half as strong 
as the piping designer intended!

What can you do?

 If your job includes putting equipment together, assembling flanged pipe, bolting manhole covers or other 
bolted connections on equipment, or other equipment assembly, remember that the job is not complete until all of 
the bolts are properly installed and tightened.
 Some equipment requires special bolt tightening procedures. For example, you may have to use  a torque 
wrench to correctly tighten the bolts to the specification, or tighten the bolts in a special order. Make sure that you 
follow the correct procedure, use the correct tools, and that you are properly trained in the equipment assembly 
procedure.
 Check pipes and equipment for properly bolted flanges as part of your plant safety inspections. As simple 
guidance, bolts that do not extend beyond the nuts should be reviewed by a plant piping craftsman or engineer.
 If you observe improperly bolted flanges in your plant, report them so they can be repaired, and make sure the 
required repairs are completed.
 Inspect new equipment, or equipment which has been re-assembled after maintenance, to make sure it is 
correctly assembled and properly bolted before starting up.

Finish the job – make sure flanges are properly bolted!

AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

