www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

http://www.dekra-process-safety.com/

Work Permits – Understand the Scope of Work

June 2018

This issue sponsored by

1

3

5

2

4

6

A contractor maintenance crew was preparing to install a 

section of pipe at the top of a vessel in an oil refinery (1,2). A 
work permit (3) was issued for the job, with the expectation 
that no confined space entry was required. The scope of work 
was only to install the pipe section. The permit indicated that 
“Nitrogen Purge or Inerted” was N/A (Not Applicable) 
although the vessel was being purged with nitrogen (4).

Workers noticed that a roll of tape had been left inside the 
vessel (5) and decided to try to remove it before installing the 
pipe (6). They were unable to remove the tape using a long 
wire. At this point, a worker tried to get closer to remove the 
tape and was overcome by the oxygen depleted atmosphere 
near the opening and fell into the vessel. It is also possible that 
he may have climbed into the vessel to remove the tape, 
planning to quickly climb back out. The worker collapsed 
inside the vessel, and, to make the tragedy worse, a co-worker 
entered the vessel in a rescue attempt and also collapsed in the 
nearly pure nitrogen atmosphere. Both workers died from 
nitrogen asphyxiation.

This incident has been discussed in other Beacons – June 

2012 about nitrogen hazards, and April 2015 on the importance 
of work permit procedures. But there is another lesson – the 
importance of recognizing a change in scope of work for any 
job which requires a work permit. The change might introduce 
additional hazards which require additional safeguards.

Pictures from US Chemical Safety Board Video - http://www.csb.gov/videos/hazards-of-nitrogen-asphyxiation/

Did You Know?
 The work permit did not warn the 

maintenance crew about the nitrogen purge.
 As soon as the maintenance crew decided to 
remove the roll of tape by reaching into the 
vessel, the scope of the job changed. The 
original permit did not consider the need to 
remove anything from inside the vessel. A 
new permit should have been issued, 
considering potential confined space entry to 
remove the tape.

 In this case, a confined space entry permit 

was required, even for a person to reach into 
the vessel to remove the tape. When any part 
of the body of a person breaks the plane of an 
opening large enough to allow full entry, a 
confined space permit is required. This is the 
position of US OSHA and other authorities.

What Can You Do?

NOAA/Institute for Exploration/University of Rhode Island 

(NOAA/IFE/URI) Public domain.

 If you issue a work permit, be sure that:

o Hazards are identified and explained to the people doing the work.
o Required safety procedures are specified and understood.
o Personal protective equipment is available and used.
o The people doing the work clearly understand the scope of work, 

and the need to stop work and contact you before they do 
anything not included the initial job scope.

 If you are working on a job requiring a work permit:

o Understand the hazards, safety procedures, and protective 

equipment.

o Understand the job scope.
o As you do the job, ensure for every step that you recognize any 

change in the scope of work. Stop the job and consult the person 
who issued the permit before you do anything not included in the 
initial job scope!

o If you are not sure if the job scope has changed, stop and ask the 

person who issued the permit.

Recognize a change in scope of work for a permitted job!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

