 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp://www.ccpsonline.org/safetybeaconfrm.aspMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJanuary 2006CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and Spansh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and SpanishishTime Sensitive Chemicals Time Sensitive Chemicals ŒŒand Sharing Lessons and Sharing Lessons Through 50 CCPS Process Safety Beacons! Through 50 CCPS Process Safety Beacons! Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersLearn from experience Œreport and share incidents and near misses!Did You Know?Did You Know?What You Can DoWhat You Can DoMany chemicals have a ‚shelf life™,they become unstable or reactive with time in storage. For example, some monomers require inhibitor to prevent polymerization, and, after a period of time, the inhibitor is consumed. The manufacturer of such chemicals will normally provide an ﬁexpiration dateﬂfor the material, and it is important to use the material or properly dispose of it before that expiration date. A company had two ﬁnear missesﬂŒbulging or ruptured drums Œbecause time sensitive chemicals had been stored too long.PSID Members see Free Search: Reactive ChemicalsFortunately nobody was hurt, and damage was minor. The company had a good system for reporting and sharing near misses, and these incidents were shared throughout the organization. Another plant saw the reports, and immediately checked all of the material in the warehouse. They found four drums of the same material which were past the expiration date and had begun to polymerize. Luckily, none of the drums had ruptured. The plant safely discarded the material and a potential explosion or injury was avoided.ŁSome reactive chemicals must be used by a specified date or they will become unstable.ŁOther chemicals can accumulate impurities (such as peroxides) over time and can also become unstable.ŁMaterial Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) should tell you if materials can become unstable with time or need special storage conditions.ŁReporting and investigating ﬁnear missesﬂis an excellent way to prevent future incidents.ŁThat the December 2005 Beacon was the 50thissue, sharing lessons from safety incidents with thousands of people in 11 languages.ŁKnow if chemicals in your workplace can become unstable during storage Œcheck the MSDS, with your safety specialist, or contact the supplier.ŁUnderstand and follow your company™s procedure for managing time sensitive materials (make sure you have one!); they should not be stored too long.ŁReport all incidents and near misses to help prevent future incidents.ŁShare incidents with us at the CCPS Beacon so we can all learn from your experiences, and READ AND SHARE THE BEACON!