 What can you do?Understand allprocess risks in your plant and your role in managing them!The November and December 2014 issues of the Process Safety Beaconmarked the 30thanniversary of two of the worst industrial disasters in history Œthe November 1984 explosions and fires at an LPG terminal in San Juan Ixhuatepec, Mexico City, Mexico (1) and the December 1984 toxic gas release in Bhopal, India (2). These incidents were catastrophes impacting tens of thousands of people. The ﬁWhat can you do?ﬂ sections of these Beaconsencouraged you to understand the worst thing that might possibly happen in your plant, and your role in making sure that event does not happen.However, you should also be aware that the worst process incident that can happen in your plant may not be the same as the highest process risk. Risk is a combination of how likely an incident is, and how bad the consequences could be (3). The process incident in your plant with the worst consequences may be very unlikely to occur. Other less severe incidents may be more likely, making the risk of these events higher than the incident with the worst consequences.. You should be aware of all process risks in your plant, and your role in managing all of those process risks.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing Personnel©AIChE 2015. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.What is the process risk?The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsJanuary 2015This issue sponsored bywww.iomosaic.comAsk similar questions to those suggested in the December 2014 Beaconfor allof the process risks in your plant:What are all of the process risks in the area where I work and in my job?What are the systems in place to manage these risks Œboth to prevent process incidents happening and for reducing the consequences if they do happen?How do I know that these process risk management systems are adequate and working properly?What is my role in making sure that the systems for managing all of the process risks in my plant are functioning properly?Likelihood (Probability/Frequency)RISKConsequence (Impact)123