 ŁTransferring flammable liquids is always a risk with potentially significant consequences. Monitor transfers closely so you can detect and respond to spills and leaks early!!!!ŁNever drive into a flammable cloud! Vehicles can provide ignition sourcesŠsuch as a hot engine manifold or muffler. These are often well above the autoignition temperature of many flammables. Remember, if a cloud is ignited by the vehicle you are driving, you will have a front row seat and be the center of the explosion. ŁTake every report of an unusual occurrence or odor seriously and respond quickly and thoroughly. Note: If the engine of the vehicle you are driving begins to rev up on its own, shut it down and get out immediately. You may have driven into a flammable atmosphere. CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceCCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AlliancePProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelSeptember 2004What Happened?CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2004. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSOverflow + Ignition Source = Tank Farm FireLate one evening, a large storage tank containing a flammable liquid began to overflow. It was not detected until a security guard noticed a strong odor. He immediately called the area operations personnel to report his concern. Two operators responded by driving a truck to the area to investigate. Within minutes, there was a loud explosion and fire. (It is believed that their truck provided the ignition source that caused the initial deflagration and ensuing fires.) It took plant and civic personnel a day and a half to extinguish the fires which moved from one tank to the next.Sponsored by CCPSSupportersWhat YOU Can DoThis is what can happen when a tank containing a flammable liquid overflows!Whenever Flammables are Released, a Fire is Just a Spark Away !PSID Members See Free SearchŠTank FireMore than a dozen employees were hospitalized and there was significant property damage.How Did it Start?The tank was being filled but the operators did not know that the level indication ANDANDthe safety alarm systems had failed. They did not monitor the filling operation closely because they believed that the tank still had plenty of capacity remaining. And, they did not take the security guard seriously or respond promptly when he reported the strong odor since he was new on the job. Like most significant events, a number of things ﬁfailedﬂ Œall at the same time!This edition is also available in German, French, Spanish, Portuguese and Chinese. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.