 What can you do?Why did this happen?Don™t assume that safety systems work Œcheck them!March 2008AIChE ©2008. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319Do your shutoff systems actually work?Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhile the system was designed with the correct safeguards, they were not functional as a system. The pump and shutoff valve were too far from the receiving tank to stop flow before the tank overflowed Œthe liquid in the pipe downstream of the valve was enough to overflow the tank even though the valve had closed. Alternatively, the high level switch could be installed lower in the tank to shut the flow off sooner and account for the materials between the shut off valve and the receiving tank. In general, it is good practice to locate a device to prevent tank overflow as close to the tank being protected as possible. What happened?A small chemical feed system was designed to refill automatically. It had a high shut off interlock that stopped the feed pump and closed a feed valve to prevent overflowing the tank. The level control system had a malfunction, the tank was filled above the design level, and the high level switch tripped. Before the control system could close the valves and stop the pump, the tank overflowed. Fortunately, no employees were injured and the spill was contained to limit environmental damage.ŁDuring a process hazard analysis, or any other safety review, ask if anyone has verified that automatic shutoff systems actually work effectively.ŁWhen starting up a new or modified safety system, test operation of the entire system to verify that it operates as intended.ŁReview testing procedures for critical shut off systems, and make sure they actually test the complete system, not just single components of the system. ŁDo not accept small spills as the ﬁcost of doing businessﬂ. Small spills indicate problems which may be prevalent in the facility and should not be regarded as normal. Where there is one inadequate design, maintenance practice, or operating procedure, others are often present.The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.CCPS PSID Members:See "Free Search: Level Control"