 The passengers and crew of US Airways Flight 1549 from New York City to Charlotte, North Carolina expected a routine flight on January 15, 2009. But, approximately 2 minutesafter takeoff, the plane struck a flock of birds and lost power in both engines. The plane was at low altitude (about 3000feet, 1000 meters), had no power, and was in a large urban area. There was danger, not only to passengers and crew, but to tens of thousands of people on the ground. It was time for the crew (Captain Chesley B. Sullenberger, First Officer Jeffrey B. Skiles, and Flight Attendants Sheila Dail, Doreen Welsh, and Donna Dent) to put everything they had learnedfrom many years training and experience into practice, and quickly. The pilots determined that they could not re-start the engines, and did not have sufficient altitude to glide to any airport. Their only option was a water landing in the Hudson River. The cabin crew prepared passengers for an emergency landing, while the pilots prepared and flew theaircraft. The pilots successfully landed in the Hudson River west of mid-town Manhattan. All 150 passengers and 5 crew members safely evacuated the plane and were rescued by nearby commercial and rescue boats. The time from when the airplane struck the birds until it landedin the river was about 6 minutes!The entire crew was later awarded the Master's Medal of the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators for ﬁa heroic and unique aviation achievement.ﬂTraining and forethought prepare you for emergencies!April 2009AIChE ©2009. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Be Prepared!Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS Process CCPS Process Safety Incident Safety Incident Database (PSID)Database (PSID)http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.A manufacturing process, like a modern airplane, is a complex machine. Most of the time, it works very well, but you never know when something might go wrong and you will have to respond to an emergency. You must always be prepared by understanding your plant, how it works, how it will respond to your actions, and what to do in an emergency. And, you can also understand the hazards of your plant, anticipate what might go wrong, and how you should respond.ŁTake training seriously. For example, every airline flight begins with a safety awareness announcement Œdo you pay attention to it? Emergencies are rare, but they can happen to you. You must know how to respond. You may not have much time to decide what to do, and preparationand training are critical to proper action.ŁBefore starting any activity, take a few moments to think aboutwhat might go wrong, what the potential consequences are, how your equipment will react, and what you will do. If you don™t know, get help from your supervisor, and do not start the activity until you are comfortable that you understand how to respond to an emergency.ŁParticipate in emergency response and ﬁtable topﬂdrills so you are better prepared.Passengers and crew evacuating US Air Flight 1549 following emergency water landing in the Hudson River in New York City PSID Members Free Search for ﬁEmergency Response" and "Evacuationﬂ