 PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelDecember 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and Spansh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Portuguese, and SpanishishStartup HazardsStartup HazardsSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersPlan for safety for start to finish!Did You Know?Did You Know?What You Can DoWhat You Can DoOf 38 major incidents investigated by the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB) since 1998, three occurred during startup of continuous process equipment.These three incidents resulted in 22 fatalities and more than 170 injuries.Other serious incidents occurred during startup of batch processes or during maintenance operations that followed a power outage.Startups may be rare, so refresher training may be needed.Have complete and accurate written startup procedures and checklists, and use them.Use Management of Change reviews before modifying any startup procedures.Ask questions and get help with startup operations which are not familiar to you.Check with the responsible people that shutdown activities have been completed and equipment approved for use.Verify equipment functionality and setup before startup, including pre-startup safety review after major maintenance or modifications.Make sure all valves are in the proper position. Maintain excellent communication between outside operations and the control room!PSID Members see Free Search: StartupA number of chemical facilities have had disastrous events occurduring startup activities. In many cases, these events point tothe need for a higher level of attention and care than that needed for routine processing. WHY? Startup hazards are increased by inexact operating instructions, lack of experience in startup operations, and a plant in a non-standard condition Œfor example,feed tanks empty, manual valves in the wrong position, new or modified equipment. Time pressures to get the plant back in operation may be high, and operators may have worked long hours during the shutdown, making them less alert. Many plants require manual operation during startup. Continuous plants may startup so infrequently that plant personnel have little experience with required steps.