This issue sponsored by

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

http://www.dekra-process-safety.com/

What if your agitator fails?

August 2018

In 1993 in a German factory, o-chloronitrobenzene was reacted with 

caustic soda dissolved in methanol to produce o-nitroanisol in a 36 m³ (9500 
US gal) batch reactor. This reaction is exothermic (generates heat), and the 
addition of caustic normally took place at about 80 °C over 5 hours. 

Surprisingly, a batch did not require cooling! In fact, rather than needing 

cooling to maintain the required batch temperature, steam heating was 
required. Then it was found that the agitator had not been on during the 
caustic addition. The reactants were not properly mixed (1). The agitator 
was started, the unreacted chemicals were mixed (2), and the batch 
temperature quickly increased, exceeding 160 °C (320 °F). At the elevated 
temperature a different, also exothermic, reaction occurred. 10 m³ (2650 US 
gal) of reactor contents were vented to the atmosphere through a
pressure relief valve. A large area, including nearby residences, was contaminated. Nobody was injured, but health risk 
concerns remain. Direct costs were about 40 million DM (in 1993, equivalent to about US $ 38 million today).

1

2

Did You Know?

What Can You Do?

 Chemicals can’t react if they do not come into con-

tact with each other. If there is no agitation in a 
reactor, the reaction will be slow or stop, and 
unreacted chemicals will accumulate. In an exo-
thermic reaction this is a serious hazard. If you re-
start the agitator, there will be a lot of unreacted 
material available and the reaction may be very fast. 
Your cooling system may not be able to remove the 
heat fast enough to control the reactor temperature.
 Mixing is clearly important in a vessel containing a 
multi-phase mixture such as liquid-solid or organic-
aqueous liquid phases. It is also important if the 
materials in the vessel are mutually soluble. In the 
pictures below, balsamic vinegar, which is 
completely soluble in water, is added to water 
without mixing. The vinegar sinks to the bottom of 
the glass and does not form a uniform solution until 
the mixture is stirred with a spoon.

 If you lose agitation in a reactor, batch or continuous, get 
technical assistance before re-starting the agitator. Gather 
some data to share with technical experts to help decide on 
the appropriate action. For example, how long was the 
agitator off, what was added to the vessel while it was off, 
what is the temperature and pressure history of the vessel?
 Recognize that loss of agitation can be a problem in other 

vessels even if there is no intended reaction. Without 
agitation, there can be large temperature and concentration 
differences in the vessel. This can cause freezing on cooling 
surfaces, boiling near heating surfaces, precipitation of solids 
from a solution, or settling of solids from a slurry. Variation 
in composition of material fed from an improperly mixed 
vessel to other equipment can cause operating or safety 
issues in downstream process units.

 Heating or cooling of a vessel without agitation is likely to 

be inefficient, and temperature indication may be inaccurate 
if the vessel contents are not mixed.

Reference  Gustin, J-L., “How the Study of Accident Case Histories Can Prevent Runaway Reaction Accidents to Occur Again.” IChemE Symposium Series No. 148, pp. 27-40, 2001.

Keep your reactor agitated for safety!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

