 Process Safety Beacon CCPS An AIChE Industry Technology Alliance Sponsored by Risk, Reliability and Safety Engineering Could It Happen Here! How Well Are You Trained to Respond to Fires? A nighttime fire fighting exercise Controlled burn of Sodium Hydride The first picture is a nighttime fire fighting training exercise. The second is of a controlled burn of Sodium Hydride with fire suppression material around it, following an incident where this material caught fire. Here are some things you can do to prevent fire from occurring or to make sure it is handled safely and correctly. Look for the new CCPS book ﬁGuidelines for Fire Protectionﬂ, coming May 2003 AIChE © 2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps@aiche.org or 212-591-7319. http://www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htm Fire Prevention and Planning Understand possible fire scenarios then know how to report a fire Check bonding and ground wires to prevent static ignition when handling flammables liquids or combustible dusts {PSID members see incident 422} Know your emergency routes, locations of emergency shelters and rally points Take fire extinguisher training, yearly if possible Different classes of fires (rubbish, flammables/combustibles, electrical or metals) require different extinguishing materials. Make sure you have the right fire fighting equipment for all potential fires Responding to Fire Always sound a fire alarm before fighting a fire Call for help and make sure it is coming before fighting a fire Fight fires only if you have been trained to do so Make sure you leave a safe unobstructed path for retreat when fighting a fire ﬁStop, Drop and Rollﬂ if your clothing or hair catches fire. Make contingency plans and train on handling and disposing of hazardous materials after a fire has occurred, including medical response to hazardous exposures Messages for Manufacturing Personnel February 2003