 If you read the December 2008 Beacon, you will notice that the pictures are the same! Yes, this is the same incident. A fire started in a packaging area while a 300-gallon portable steel tank (a ﬁtoteﬂ) was being filled with ethyl acetate. See the December Beacon for more information. In December, we discussed the importance of proper bonding and grounding of all conductive equipment to prevent static electric sparks, which can ignite a flammable atmosphere. We have often emphasized in the Beacon that all incidents have multiple lessons, and we are using the same incident to make several additional points.Note, as shown in Figure 1 (top), that the tote was being filled with a short nozzle, and the flammable ethyl acetate dropped into the tote as a stream through the air, and undoubtedly also formed small droplets and mist particles. Static electric charge can be created by liquid freely falling through air, and can result in sparks which can cause ignition of a flammable atmosphere. The recommended practice (by the National Fire Protection Association ŒNFPA 77) for filling portable metal tanks is to bottom-fill, which can be done with a dip pipe. You should use a slow velocity of 1 meter per second (3.3 feet per second) or less until the dip pipe is submerged to about 150 millimeters (6 inches). Figure 2 (bottom) shows the recommended system.We are still not finished with this incident! We will talk about some more lessons in the February Beacon.Avoid free fall of flammable liquids when filling containers or tanks!January 2009AIChE ©2008. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 212-591-7319Fire while filling portable container!Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Turkish, andVietnamese.Figure 1:Actual fill systemFigure 2:Recommended fill systemŁAlways use properly designed equipment for filling any containers with flammable liquids. Some things to consider:ŁUse dip pipes or bottom fillingŁUse appropriately low flow rate when there is potential for freefalling liquidŁProperly ground and bond all equipment and containersŁUse fill nozzles and hoses designed for flammable material handling, for example, a hose with an integral metal braid bonded to piping or fittings connected to the hoseŁWhen you read the BEACON, look for other lessons from the incidents described. We have a limited amount of space, and there is much more to learn from the incidents we discuss than we can describe in a single page!PSID Members Free Search for "Static Charge" On behalf of all of the readers of the Beacon in 29 languages, CCPS and the CCPS Process Safety Beacon Committee would like to thank all of our volunteer translators for their efforts on behalf of process safety throughout the world in 2008. All translators are volunteers, and the only compensation that they receive is the knowledge that their efforts are helping to improve process safety throughout the process industries. Because of their volunteer efforts, CCPS is able to distribute the Process Safety Beacon in 29 languages as of December 2008. If you know, or meet, any of our translators in the course of your work, please thank them personally for their work. If you are interested in translating the Beacon into a language which is not currently available, please contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org and we will provide you with information on the procedure for translation. Afrikaans: Francois Holtzhausen, Sasol Korean: Hwan Bae, SK Corporation Arabic: Khalid Walid Haj Ahmed, Alfaisal University Malay: Pillai Sreejith, Trident Consultants and Amiruddin Bin Abu Bakar, PETRONAS Brazilian Portuguese: Antonio Lauzana, Petrobras / Repar Marathi: Shirish Gulawani, Excel Industries Ltd., and Thermax Limited Chinese: Li Yi, Kunming Cellulose Fibers Co., Ltd Persian (Farsi): Mostafa Sadeghpour National Iranian Oil Refinery and Distribution Company(NIORDC) Danish: Martin Anker Nielsen and Ole Raadam, Becht Engineering Co., Inc. Polish: Fabian Cieslik, 3M, and Agnieszka Majchrzak, Pock, Poland Dutch: Marc Brorens, BP Rotterdam Refinery Portuguese: Nuno Pacheco, Repsol Polímeros and Helder Figueira, DuPont Safety Resources French: Robert Gauvin, Pétromont Russian: Sergey V. Belyaev, EHS Manager German: Dieter Schloesser, Basell Spanish: Julio Miranda, ACM Automation Inc. Gujarati: Mayoor Vaghela, HELPS Safety Consultant Swedish: David Aronsson, DSM Anti-Infectives Hebrew: Yigal Riezel Tamil: Varun Bharti, Cholamandalam MS Risk Services Ltd. Hindi: Alok Agrwal, Chilworth Safety & Risk Management Thai: Surak Sujaritputangoon, HMC Polymers Co., Ltd. Hungarian: Maria Molnarne, BAM, Berlin Traditional Chinese: S.G.Lin, Taiwan PolySilicon Corp. Indonesian: IIPS (Alvin/Darmawan/Vidya/ Wahyu) Turkish: Hasim Sakarya, Dow Italian: Cesare Mazzini and Monia Casana, Uniqema Vietnamese: Ha Van Truong, BP Japanese: Takuya Kotani and colleagues, SCE-NET