This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

June 2011

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Are you prepared for a natural disaster?

Earthquakes, hurricanes and typhoons, tornadoes, tsunamis, 
wildfires, floods – we have read news of all of these and other 
natural disasters in recent years. All of these catastrophes cause 
terrible damage directly. They can also cause additional damage due 
to the impact they can have on hazardous material storage and 
processing facilities. Do you know what kind of natural disasters 
might happen at your plant? Do you know what to do to prepare for 
these disasters, and how to recover following a disaster? 

1 – Fire at an oil refinery in Japan following the March 11, 2011 Tōhoku 
earthquake; 2 – A tornado in Oklahoma; 3 – A wildfire in California; 4 – Damage to 
the Fukushima nuclear power plant following the March 2011 earthquake

2

3

1

4

Did you know?
Did you know?

What can you do?

In a 2010 report “Flirting with Natural 
Disasters”, FM Global, one of the world's 
largest commercial property insurance 
companies, discussed some of the reasons 
why organizations fail to prepare for natural 
disasters. Some of the findings include:
 People underestimate the risk of natural 
disaster – they think “it won't happen here.”
 As more time passes without a disaster, 
people find it easier to deny its likelihood.
 Companies overestimate how well 
prepared they are for dealing with a natural 
disaster.
 Many companies focus on recovery from 
disaster rather than proactive activities to 
minimize damage.

 Understand the direct impact that a natural disaster can 
have on your plant, and also the impact of utility 
interruptions caused by the disaster.
 Review your plant emergency plans for disaster. Be sure 
that the plans make sense – can you actually perform the 
tasks required with the available time and resources? If you 
see problems, inform your management of your concerns.
 Make sure that all equipment and Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) needed to prepare for, and to respond to, a 
natural disaster and its aftermath is available, properly 
maintained, and ready for use.
 Participate in natural disaster preparation and response 
drills, take them seriously, and report any problems you see 
during drills.
 Download and read the FM Global report from 
www.fmglobal.com/disaster.

“An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” - Benjamin Franklin

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

