 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored by CCPSSupportersPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelNovember 2003Here™s What Happened:Temperature and Pressure RatingsŠusually an inverse relationship!How Did This Happen?How Did This Happen?But the pressure rating was okay–!?CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYWhat You Can Do What You Can Do Remember that most equipment has lower pressure ratings at high temperatures. Looking only at the pressure rating can get you in trouble when heating is also involved. Know your equipment limitations and compensate where needed! Don™t assume that a practice is safe just because it has not caused an accident before. You may have been lucky or the situation might have been slightlydifferent before. This time may result in an accident.All operating and maintenance activities must be done ﬁby-the-bookﬂ on allshifts. Don™t try new things without evaluating the change (MOC) and do not revert to old outdated practices. AIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319This edition is also available in Spanish, French and German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.SSThe picture on the immediate left shows a new rotameter. The other picture shows what happened when it was exposed to excessive pressure at high temperatures.In this case, the line down stream of the rotameter had a history of plugging. Several times in the past, 150 psig steam was used successfully to clear the plug. When it plugged again, steam was used but this time the outcome was different! WHY?WHY?The Facts:The rotameter was rated for 175 psig at 200oF. At 360oF, the rating drops to only 80 psig. Steam used to clear the plug was 150 psig and 360o F.The rotameter failed because it could not withstand the steam pressure at the elevated temperature. The History:Using steam to clear this line had been done many times in the past but was officially discontinued approximately two years ago. However, it was practiced ﬁun-officiallyﬂ during off-shifts.The supervisor was uncertain of the pressure rating of the piping and rotameter and had second thoughts. When he saw that the steam hose was already connected, he decided to proceed.