 One of the six reactors in series needed repairs. To minimize downtime, it was decided to bypass that one reactor and repair it off line. A temporary bypass line was installed using a pipe with an expansion bellows on each end and supported by scaffolding. Because of the rush to resume production, the new bypass was not tested prior to start up nor were engineering standards or manufacturer™s recommendations considered. Approximately three months later, the expansion bellows in the bypass line failed and released an estimated 30 tons of flammable cyclohexane. The resultant vapor cloud ignited killing 28 people and injuring 89 more. The entire plant was destroyed and hundreds of homes and stores were damaged.CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceThis Edition Sponsored byPfizerPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJune 2004CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSWhat Happened?What You Can DoPSID Sponsors see: Free SearchŠManagement of Changehttp://www.pfizer.comEvaluate EveryEverychange, even Temporary onesŠfor Expected and UnexpectedUnexpectedConsequences FlixboroughŠ30 Years Ago–Why this HappenedThe temporary modification was not adequately reviewed for potential adverse consequences!ŁThe temporary bypass was made with two bends in it because the nozzles on the two tanks were at different levels. The impact of internal forces and flow stresses were not considered on the expansion bellows.ŁExpansion bellows were left in place on each end of the bypass line. The suitability of this design and manufacturer™s recommendations were not considered. ŁThe weight of the temporary bypass was not securely supportedŠit was simply placed on scaffolding. The amount of movement and the effect of that movement on the bellows were not considered. ŁAlways follow your company™s Management of Change (MOC) procedure. Remember, temporary changes demand the same rigorous review as do permanent changes. If you do not utilize a MOC procedure, discuss the value it could provide to your facility.ŁMake changes onlyafter thorough hazard reviews have been conducted and approved by qualified experts.ŁUse good engineering practices and manufacturer™s recommendations.See the Chemical Safety Board web site: http://www.csb.gov/safety_publications/docs/moc082801.pdffor MOC related accidents. This edition is also available in Spanish, French, Portuguese, Chinese and German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.