 ŁOverflowing a tank or other process vessel has been an important contributing cause to many major incidents in the process industries. Recent examples include the Texas City, Texas refinery explosion in March 2005 (a distillation column was overfilled), and the Buncefield, England fire in December 2005 (overflow of a flammable liquid storage tank).ŁIn many overflow incidents, there has been a failure of vessel level instrumentation and high level alarms.A large storage tank containing a flammable liquid overflowed. The spill was not detected until a security guard noticed a strong odor. He immediately reported his concern to operations personnel. Two operators responded, driving a truck to the area to investigate. Within minutes, there was a loud explosion followed by a fire. It is believed that the truck provided the ignition source. It took emergency response personnel a day and a half to extinguish the fires which spread through the tank farm. More thanDon™t try to put 10 gallons of liquid in a 5 gallon pail!September 2009AIChE ©2009. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Overflow + Ignition = Tank Farm Fire! (Part 1)Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.a dozen employees were hospitalized and there was significant property damage. The incident investigation found that the tank was being filled and, unknown to the operators, the tank level gauge AND the high level alarm had failed. The operators did not monitor the filling operation closely because they believed that the tank still had plenty of capacity. Do you know?ŁRecognize that transferring a flammable liquid is a hazardous operation with significant consequences if something goes wrong. Monitor flammable liquid transfers closely so you can detect and respond to spills and leaks.ŁBefore starting a transfer, make sure there is enough room in the destination tank for the material you intend to transfer. Check both source and destination tank level, temperature, and pressure at frequent intervals during transfers, and investigate any unexpected variation in the rate of change.ŁWhen transferring liquids, estimate how much time it should take to fill the destination tank at the expected flow rate, and investigate if the transfer takes too long.ŁComplete each step of the transfer procedure before moving on to the next step, and record and sign off on the procedure if required.ŁIf you are aware of the failure of any critical instruments or alarms in your plant, report them immediately so they can be repaired.ŁFollow up on reported failures to make sure that repairs are made in a timely fashion.Coming in the October 2009 Beacon --More lessons from this incidentincluding discussion of motor vehicles as potential ignition sources.