 Did you know?Learn from the experience of others!February 2008AIChE ©2008. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319How Can You Use ﬁThe Beaconﬂ?Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.ŁNearly all incidents are the result of more than one failure. Some failures result in near misses -that is they did not cause an incident this time, but could have. ŁAlmost every month, ﬁThe Beaconﬂreceives a number of emails pointing out other lessons that can be learned from the incident discussed, which have not been included in the Beacon.ŁBecause of the limited space available in ﬁThe Beaconﬂ, we must pick one of the many lessons from each incident, and focus the Beacon on that lesson. But there are always other lessons.ŁWhenever possible, if the reports on the incidents described are publicly available, we will provide a reference in the Beacon cover email note.One important issue in maintaining a good process safety culturein any organization is to maintain a sense of vulnerability. In other words, we must always remember, and respect, the hazards associated with our processes and materials. If we have good and effective process safety management systems, one result is that we will have fewer incidents. This can lead to complacency -we forget why we are doing all of the activities in the processsafety management system which result in good performance and few or no incidents. So, it is important to use resources like "The Beacon" to remind ourselves of what can happen if we don't do those activities Œsuch as Hazard Identification and Risk Analysis (including assigning our most knowledgeable people to Process Hazard Analysis studies), Operating Procedures, Asset Integrity and Reliability, Management of Change, Emergency Management, Incident Investigation, Auditing, and others. In allof the incidents we discuss in the Beacon, there has been a failure in one or more of these important process safety management systemsWhat can you do?ŁGood Œpost the Beacon in places where workers will see it and read it Œfor example, bulletin boards, locker rooms, lunch rooms, control rooms, the gate house.ŁBetter Œuse the Beacon as the basis for safety meetings or other safety discussions with operators and other workers.ŁBetter yet ŒDevelop additional information which relates the topic in the Beacon to the operations in your own plant, including any similar incidents or near misses in your company, and discuss this information with workers.ŁBest ŒUnit or plant management leads a discussion of the Beacon with workers and challenges them to find other lessons in the incident described, beyond those discussed in the Beacon. Challenge plant safety committees to use the Beacon in their work.