 This issue sponsored byWhat can youdo?In a number of serious events, theremay have beenmore people in theareathan were needed todoor monitor thejob. Some examples:•Nineteen people managed to escape, although some were engulfed in flames,when investigating a leaking oil pipe in a refinery. The leak suddenlyincreased in size releasing a flammable vapor cloud which ignited (1).•There were 17 fatalities from an explosion when a compressor removingvapors from a wastewater storage tank was restarted. The tank unexpectedlycontained a flammable atmosphere (2).•Three of five workers investigating a pipe leak in a metal processing plantwere fatally injured whena hydrogen fire brokeout (3).Therisk of a serious event is higher when equipment is starting up, shuttingdown,or in abnormal operation. Why? In some cases, safeguards may not befullyfunctional during a transition. During startup, it is possible that somebodymade a mistake in preparing the equipment for startup and something is notcorrect. Perhaps a valve that should be closed has been left open, a blind hasbeen left in a line, or some other error. People doing the startup arefocused onthe task at hand and may not be thinking about what could go wrong or whathappens if it does. Upset conditions may create a large number of alarms whichhidea potential problem.Toomany people in the area, whether the control room or theplant,can be adistraction,causing bad decisionswhich could lead to seriousprocess safetyevents. They may also be injured by the event, and there was no good reason forthem to be in the area.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThink about who is not required to be present when starting up equipment or investigating a problem!Who are all these people?The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean,Malay, Marathi,Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish,Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsFebruary 2015Reviewoperating proceduresfor non-standard operatingmodes•for example, startup, shutdown, process upset,investigating a process or equipmentproblem. The procedures should considerwho is allowed in theareaand who isn†t.If this information is notclear,bring it to the attention of plant management. Here are some questions that the operatingprocedure should have answers for:1.Whois essential to this task? Who MUST bethere? Whoarejust concerned peoplewhodo not need to be in thearea and who should be directed to go to asafer location?For planned activities such as startup and shutdown, thisshouldbe determined when thestartup or shutdown planisdeveloped.2.Ifsomething goes wrong, whatcould happentopeople inthearea?3.Review emergency procedures for leaks•do they consider what people who are not essential for response shoulddo while the leak is being investigated?4.Do all peoplein thearea knowwhat they should do if a loss of containmentoccurs?Arethey using theproperpersonal protective equipment?5.Consider postponing tasks topreventnon-essentialpeople frombeing in an area during non-standard operatingmodes.6.Ifyou don†t have aspecific, defined job to do in the operation, maybe you shouldgo somewhere else!If you are notsure, askfor permission from the areasupervisor or operatorto bepresentwhile this operationis taking place.www.acutech-consulting.com©AIChE2015.All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for anycommercial purposewithoutexpress written consent ofAIChE isstrictlyprohibited. Contactus atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 646-495-1371.123