This issue sponsored by

September 2011

www.iomosaic.com

October 2011

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Hose Hazards!

Hoses can be a significant hazard in a process plant. They must be 
properly maintained, stored, and inspected. Here are some examples of 
incidents caused by hose failure:
(cid:190) An unloading hose on a chlorine railroad tank car failed (top and middle 
pictures) because of corrosion. It was found that the hose was not made of 
the correct material. It was stainless steel instead of the specified Hastelloy 
C, a metal alloy. Nearly 25 tons of chlorine was released, 63 neighbors 
sought medical attention, hundreds had to shelter in place, and a highway 
was closed.
(cid:190) A hose used to unload cylinders of phosgene, a highly toxic gas, failed 
(bottom picture). A worker was exposed and later died in the hospital. The 
hose was made of the specified material of construction, although 
company engineers had recommended changing to a different material. It 
was found that an adhesive tag on the hose trapped phosgene which slowly 
diffused from inside the hose through the plastic hose core. This caused 
faster corrosion under the label, and that is where the failure occurred.
(cid:190) There are many reports of  dirty hoses causing contamination of process 
equipment, product contamination, and dangerous chemical reactions.
(cid:190) If a hose is blocked with solid material, it will pressurize up to the line 
pressure. If the blockage breaks free, a projectile could be released 
causing significant damage, or, if the hose is worn or weakened, it could 
burst.

Did you know?

(cid:206) Hoses are frequently connected and 
disconnected from piping, making 
connection failure more likely.
(cid:206) Hoses are often not properly handled 
and stored, making damage and failure 
more likely.
(cid:206) Frequent flexing of hoses stresses them, 
increasing the chance for failure.
(cid:206) Improper hose storage, and using the 
same hose for different purposes, increases 
the risk of contamination.
(cid:206) Plastic hose liners may be resistant to 
corrosion from chemicals, but are subject to 
permeation. Over time this damages the 
liner and the outside metal covering could 
be corroded and weakened.
(cid:206) Incidents have occurred because hoses 
were incorrectly labeled with the wrong 
material of construction.

What can you do?

(cid:206) Always inspect hoses before using them.

- Check the outside for corrosion or signs of leakage. Metal 

braided hoses which have frayed or corroded braids should be replaced.

- Be sure that you are able to see the entire outside of the hose

when you inspect it. Is part of  the hose covered by something which 
keeps you from seeing  damage? 

- Look inside to make sure the hose is clean, and not blocked.
- Check that seals (gaskets or O-rings) are in good condition.
- Check that the fittings which connect a hose are not damaged.

(cid:206) Make sure that hoses are inspected or replaced as required by your 
plant’s maintenance schedule.
(cid:206) Review your plant’s procedures for ensuring that the material of 
construction of hoses is correct.
(cid:206) Make sure you use the correct hose – particularly that it is the 
correct material of construction and pressure rating. Don't improvise!
(cid:206) Make sure hoses are properly and securely connected to piping, and 
properly supported. Long, heavy hoses are particularly vulnerable.
(cid:206) Properly clean and store hoses to prevent contamination or damage.
(cid:206) Protect hoses from damage where vehicles could  run over them.

Use the RIGHT hose, and be sure it is clean and in good condition!

AIChE © 2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, 

Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

