www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Incident Investigation of a Steam Pipe Failure

June 2017

Figure 1:  Damage

This issue sponsored by

In November 1998 a 12 in. (30.5 cm), 600 psig (~ 41 bar[g]) 

steam pipe in a large chemical plant failed catastrophically. A 36 in. 
(~ 1 m) long section of pipe just upstream of a decommissioned 
venturi flow meter suddenly ruptured causing major damage in the 
area (Fig. 1). Steam supply throughout the plant was lost, the steam 
generation equipment shut down, and there was no production in 
most of the plant for more than 5 days. Fortunately there were no 
injuries or fatalities.

An investigation team was immediately formed to understand the 

cause of the failure of the 30 year old pipe (Fig. 2). There was 
concern about other steam piping which might be in danger of a 
similar failure. The team consisted of utility operating and 
management personnel, materials and mechanical engineers (piping, 
reliability, and failure analysis experts), and chemical engineers. 
The initial suspected cause was erosion of the pipe wall immediately 
upstream of the venturi caused by poor quality (wet) steam, 
resulting in thinning of the pipe wall. Observed lines on the pipe 
(Fig. 3) were believed to be created by erosion.

Figure 2:  Failed pipe

Figure 3:  Lines on pipe

In the course of the investigation it was determined that the pipe 
which failed had been designed to have a slight taper (about 10º) to 
smooth flow to the venturi. This taper was produced by boring a
thicker piece of pipe to the designed profile. The investigation team asked an experienced machinist to inspect the failed 
pipe. The machinist immediately recognized that the lines were not signs of erosion, but actually tool marks from a boring 
tool. When the pipe was bored, the tool had not been inserted properly, but off-center. This resulted in the pipe being only 
about 25% of the intended thickness at the top, and consequently weakened.

Lines

Did you know?

What can you do?

There is a reason for including a team of people 
with different expertise in an incident investigation, 
or any other process safety management activity 
(process hazard analysis, management of change, 
pre-startup safety review, etc.). Everybody involved 
has a unique expertise to bring to the discussion, 
based on their education, training, and most 
importantly, their work experience. In this incident, 
the engineers and other experts did not recognize the 
machine tool marks on the failed pipe, and yet it was 
immediately obvious to the expert, experienced 
machinist. His knowledge completely changed the 
conclusions of the investigation, and was essential 
for understanding the cause of the incident.

Reference:  Lodal, P. N., Process Safety Progress 19 (3), pp. 154-159 (2000). 

 If you are asked to participate in an incident investigation, 

be a full participant and share your knowledge and 
expertise with the rest of the team. Your experience in 
operating or maintaining the plant is important for 
understanding the incident. Share that knowledge and ask 
questions. If something in the discussion doesn’t sound 
consistent with your experience, make sure that it is 
resolved to your satisfaction.

 You may be involved in other process safety management 
activities as an operations or maintenance representative –
for example, management of change, process hazard 
analysis, writing procedures, developing training material, 
pre-startup safety reviews, and others. Be an active 
participant in these activities, and share your knowledge 
with other participants.

Everybody has something to contribute when investigating an incident!

©AIChE 2017. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

