 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored byPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJuly 2004Here™s What Happened:CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2004. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSHow Did this Happen?What You Can DoThis TFE lined stainless steel expansion joint was part of a piping system containing a high concentration of HCl. The expansion joint was not installed properly and HCl had embrittled the stainless steel bellows. This embrittlement along with fatigue caused by improper alignment and insufficient restraint caused the joint to fail. The catastrophic failure you see in this picture occurred the day after it passed a visual inspection. Fortunately, the system pressure was low, the leak was small, and no one was around when it failed. In this case, there were no injuries. However, if the circumstances had been only slightly different–Misalignment + Corrosion = Failure!ŁThe piping to the vessel where this expansion joint was used was misaligned by approximately ¾ inch. This caused stress on the expansion joint.ŁThe three retaining bolts that limit compression and extension were not installed on the expansion joint because of space limitations. This allowed excessive movement and placed even more stress on the joint.ŁThe specification for this joint had changed during a retrofit of the process for a new chemical service, but the expansion joint was not replaced with one of proper specification, requiring a higher grade of stainless. This likely contributed to the HCl embrittlement of the stainless steel making it prone to stress cracking and failure.ŁExpansion joints are precision engineered equipment and MUSTbe installed correctly!ŁEnsure that all equipment is installed per manufacturer™s specifications!!! Use the facility™s management of change (MOC) process to review ANY modification or change. ŁWhen making visual inspections, note everychange from previous inspections and notify the inspection department of those changes. Protect yourself against sudden failure during the inspection.Sometimes visual inspection while the equipment is in service is not enough. The equipment may have to be disassembled or simply replaced at a defined interval.ŁKnow and plan around common causes of failures:1) Expansion joints are usually weak spots in piping systems. 2) Misalignment may cause stress cracking. 3) HCl embrittles stainless steel. Inspection and maintenance programs should not overlook common causes and expected failure modes for expansion joints.PSID members see Free SearchŠExpansion JointExpansion Joints have Design LimitsŠMake Sure they are not Exceeded !http://info.knovel.com/ccpsRememberŠExpansion joints are usually the weak point in a piping system!This edition is also available in German, French, Spanish, Portuguese and Chinese. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.