www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Pressure relief valve bonnets - to plug or not to plug?

This issue sponsored by

The left photograph and diagram 
show a conventional spring loaded 
pressure relief valve. There may be a 
vent in the bonnet of the relief valve as 
shown in the diagram at bottom left. If 
the vent is present, it is normally 
supposed to be plugged when the valve is 
in service.

The photograph and diagram on the 
right show a different kind of pressure 
relief valve – a balanced bellows 
pressure relief valve. This valve has a 
bellows between the process and the 
valve bonnet. The bellows (when the 
bonnet is vented to atmosphere) prevents 
back pressure from assisting the spring in 
keeping the relief valve closed, and also 
protects the spring from corrosion.  Note 
that it may be difficult to tell what kind 
of relief valve is installed from the 
external appearance of the relief valve.

A balanced bellows relief valve may 
be used when the relief valve discharges 
to a collection header instead of directly 
to the atmosphere. In a conventional 
relief valve, the bonnet pressure is equal 
to the downstream pressure, while in a 
properly vented balanced bellows relief 
valve the bonnet pressure is atmospheric 
pressure.  For the valve to function as 
designed, the bonnet of a balanced 
bellows relief valve must be vented to 
atmospheric pressure - the vent  must not 
be plugged. It must also vent to a safe 
place. Note that, in spite of a warning 
sign, there is a plug in the vent of the 
balanced bellows relief valve in the 
picture at top right (red arrow).

May 2013

BONNET
VENT PLUGGED 
DESPITE 
WARNING SIGN

BONNET
VENT - NOT 
PLUGGED

SET PRESSURE

ADJUSTING SCREW

SPRING

BONNET

BONNET
VENT –
PLUGGED IF 
PRESENT

BODY

SEAT DISC

BELLOWS

NOZZLE

CONVENTIONAL

BALANCED BELLOWS

What can you do?

 Understand what kind of pressure relief valves you have in your 
plant, and know what you must do to ensure that they work properly.
 Ask if you have balanced bellows pressure relief valves in your 
plant. If so, make sure they are clearly identified, and post signs near the 
valves to remind people that the vent on the valve bonnet must not be 
plugged. Signs may be the only clear indication of the type of valve to 
plant operators and maintenance workers, so the signs must be kept in 
place and visible.
 If you see a balanced bellows relief valve with the vent plugged, 
report it so that it can be corrected.

Understand your plant relief valves!

AIChE © 2013. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, 

Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

