 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceCCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AlliancePProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelApril 2005CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2005. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSSponsored by CCPSSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Portuguese, and Spanish.sh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Portuguese, and Spanish.Here™s What HappenedHere™s What HappenedHow Did This Happen?How Did This Happen?What You Can DoWhat You Can DoThis incident shows that pressure, by itself, can cause a major accident!PSID Members see: Free Search--OverpressureThis accident investigated by and picture provided by the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board. Visit their site at http://www.csb.govA tank in this 55 year old facility that produces caramel coloring exploded, killing one worker and heavily damaging other equipment. Vessel fragments were thrown as far as 150 yards/130 meters and the top head of the vessel was propelled 100 yards/90 meters. Shell fragments damaged adjacent structures and equipment including an aqua ammonia tank. This resulted in the release of 26,000 pounds/12,000 kgms of aqua ammonia, causing nearby residents to be evacuated or told to shelter in place.Other major damage included collapsed concrete block walls, destruction of the spray dryer area as shown in the photograph, and the rupture of a 6 inch natural gas line. Fortunately, automatic shut-off valves in the gas line prevented a major gas release.The contents of the feed tank were overheated by steam coils, causing the vapor pressure to rise. There were no temperature alarms or interlocks to automatically stop the steam flow or notify operations that there was a problem. Because the operators were distracted by having to re-label a previously packaged order, they did not notice that the temperature in the tank had risen above specifications. At the same time the temperature was rising, the operators closed a vent line and opened an air pressurization line to the tank in an effort to ﬁblow outﬂ high viscous material. That act completely blocked in the vessel which had no emergency relief system. The resultŠcatastrophic failure to relieve the pressure.All Pressured Up and No Place to go = BOOM !Pressure Explosion ResultsŁNever completely block in a vessel. Some form of emergency or manual pressure relief (or vacuum break) system must be available.ŁVessels that are heated should be monitored closelyŠespecially if there are no safety instrumented systems or interlocks to shut off the heat source if needed. ŁBefore connecting an air or nitrogen line to a vessel, make sure that the vessel can withstand the full supply pressure or that the vessel has a suitable relief system set low enough to protect the vessel. ŁWhen doing jobs that distract you from your regular operations job, periodically check the equipment to confirm that it is still operating normally. ŁDo not underestimate the power of over-pressurization and its ability to cause catastrophic failure. Metal fragments can travel long distances and do significant damage!The explosion was a simple case of over-pressurization.