 What can you do?The December 2011 Beacondescribed an incident where a missing plug on a vent line resulted in a flammable material leak which caught fire, causing a fatality. That incident reminded us of the importance of caps and plugs on process vent lines and drains. How-ever, sometimes vents or drains should not be capped or plugged. Some (but not all!) uses of a ﬁdouble block and bleedﬂ isolation system may be examples. For example, the vent on a double block and bleed used to stop material flow by a safety shutdown system most likely needs to be open when the plant is in operation. But, be careful Œsometimes the bleed from a double block and bleed should be capped or plugged. This may be the case for a double block and bleed used only to isolate equipment for maintenance, which may only be open during maintenance isolation. Understand your application and how to operate it correctly!How does a double block and bleed work?A double block and bleed is often used for a more positive isolation of a process fluid from other equipment. It normally consists of two block valves (Valves 1 and 2 in the pictures) and a bleed valve (Valve 3) to a safe location, consistent with local environ-mental regulations. When the process fluid is feeding the downstream equipment, the valves are set as shown in Picture 1, with the isolation valves 1 and 2 open, and the bleed valve 3 closed. When the downstream equipment is to be isolated from the process fluid, the valves are set as shown in Picture 2, with isolation valves 1 and 2 closed, and bleed valve 3 open. If isolation valve 1 leaks, or is accidently opened, the fluid will be prevented from flowing to the downstream equipment by the second isolation valve 2. There will be no pressure accumulation between the two isolation valves because leaking or trapped material will flow to ﬁa safe placeﬂ through the bleed valve 3.When might it be used?Some uses of double block and bleed include:ŁIn some automatic shutdown systems, to stop material flow, such as in some fuel gas systems for burners.ŁTo provide isolation of hazardous material, temperature, or pressure during equipment maintenance or temporary shutdown.ŁTo isolate steam heat from a batch process where it is required in some steps, but heating can be hazardous in other process steps.ŁTo isolate process material feeds which are required for some operations but which can be hazardous if fed during other operations.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelKnow how to properly use your double block and bleed systems!AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Double Block and BleedThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, and Thai.This issue sponsored bywww.iomosaic.comwww.aiche.org/ccpsMarch 2012Know about any double block and bleed valve sets in your plant, and make sure you know when the bleeds should be open and when they should be closed or plugged for each installation (it may be different for different services).Understand how to properly operate a manual double block and bleed system Œclose and open valves in the right order. Know whether the bleed should be closed or plugged, or left open, for each double block and bleed installation.For an automatic safety shutdown system, the bleed is often not plugged, but check with your plant engineers to be sure.Know what may be vented through the bleed, and be sure that it vents to a safe place. Your plant engineers will have to determine what ﬁa safe placeﬂ is, depending on what the fluid is, and on its temperature and pressure. If you have a concern,ask your plant management to confirm that material released from the bleed will be safely vented.Recognize that valve manufacturers supply double block and bleed systems as a single assembly which incorporates all three valves, and be aware of any such installations in your plant. These prefabricated valve sets may look different from otherdouble block and bleed installations in your plant.ProcessVesselVent toa SAFElocationCLOSEDOPENFluidSupplyProcessVessel123ProcessVesselVent toa SAFElocationCLOSEDOPENFluidSupplyProcessVessel1231. Double Block and Bleed valves set for feeding fluid2. Double Block and Bleed valves set for isolating fluid