 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceThis Edition Sponsored byPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelApril 2004If in Doubt – Please Stay Out !!!If in Doubt – Please Stay Out !!!CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSDo You See the Hazard?Do You See the Hazard?http://www.iomosaic.comAn employee was assigned to sample the atmosphere in a reactor by using a flexible hose equipped with a rubber hand pump. To do so, he went to the open top man way and was later found dead. The reactor had been opened for catalyst unloading and was being purged with nitrogen. While the cause of this accident has not been positively determined, it is quite possible that nitrogen exiting the vessel overcame (asphyxiated) the employee.We all recognize the hazard of entering a confined space with an atmosphere containing a low oxygen level, but we should also remember that–.While purging an open vessel:Be aware that possible oxygen deficient areas can extend beyond a confined space, especially during initial gas testing and monitoring of a vessel. If there are any doubts, use a self contained breathing apparatus and an observer to call for help,if needed, when working near purged equipment openings. ŒThis is especially true for emergency responders to a possible asphyxiation accident.Control accessto the potentially dangerous area, post Danger Signs at vessel openings, and use a Safe-to-Work permitting system that includes a sign-in/sign-out log system separate from the Confined space log.Since nitrogen is a colorless, odorless gas that does not provide any indication of danger, it is truly an invisible hazard.Air normally contains approximately 20.8% oxygen. However reducing that level just a little reduces a person™s ability to function. Atmospheres with less than 19½% oxygen are defined by OSHA as ﬁoxygen deficientﬂand can be fatal over a relatively short period of time. Normal breathing is controlled by the amount of carbon dioxide in the body. Excess exposure to nitrogen can replace the carbon dioxide and cause breathing to stop completely.Nitrogen ﬁtricksﬂthe body into notbreathing.What Happened?How Did This Happen?You Can™t. The Hazard is Invisible !What You Can Do to Prevent it from Happening to YouPSID Sponsors see: Free SearchŠNitrogen PurgeTop ManwaySee the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (CSB) Web site, http://www.csb.gov/safety_publications/docs/SB-Nitrogen-6-11-03.pdf, for additional information on nitrogen asphyxiation. This edition is also available in Spanish, French, Portuguese and German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.