 http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWould you recognize the metal cover (yellow arrow) in Picture 1 as an important piece of safety equipment? If it was damaged or missing, would you know to report it so that it could be repaired or replaced?The metal cover wraps something called a ﬁlong bolt flangeless valveﬂ(also called long bolt, sandwich, flangeless, or wafer valves). Some examples, with the covers removed, are circled in red in Pictures 2 and 3. These valves have no integral flanges for bolting to pipe or vessel flanges, and have exposed bolts longer than 3 inches (about 7 cm.). If there is a fire in the area, the long bolts may be contacted directly by flames (impingement). The heat causes the bolts to expand and lengthen, allowing the gaskets on the two sides of the valve to leak. If the leaking material is flammable or combustible, it will add fuel to the fire (Picture 4). If the pipe is under pressure, a large, spraying fire that results in more damage can occur.The metal cover wraps the long bolts with a fire resistant material and encloses the entire assembly with a stainless steel covering to protect it from flame and heat impingement. It is an important safety device. It must be properly re-installed if removed for maintenance. It must also be inspected periodically to be sure it is in good condition, and any damage must be reported so it can be repaired.Understand your Safety Equipment!April 2010AIChE ©2010. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Fire Protection -Long Bolt Flangeless ValvesSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.ŁIf you have long bolt flangeless valves on piping in combustible, flammable or LPG service, make sure the covers are properly maintained at all times.ŁA cover on a long bolt flangelessvalve can hide corrosion or other damage. The covers should be removed periodically to inspect the flanges and valves under the cover, and immediately replaced following the inspection.ŁPassive fire protection on such a valve will only be rated for a short duration fire, and an inherently safer engineered solution would be to replace the flangeless valve with a fully flanged valve.What can you do?Bolted flange firesNote larger fire at thelong bolt flange joint 1234