This issue sponsored by

http://www.dekra-process-safety.com/

October 2018

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Hazardous Energy!

On April 17, 2018 a commercial airliner flying from New York to Dallas had a major failure of the left engine over 

eastern Pennsylvania. Fragments of the engine inlet and cowling (1) struck the wing (2) and fuselage, causing significant 
damage. One passenger window was blown out (3) causing rapid depressurization of the passenger cabin. The flight 
crew was able to conduct an emergency descent, and landed at Philadelphia airport. One passenger was fatally injured 
and eight others received minor injuries. The preliminary US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) report on 
the incident indicated that one of the engine fan blades had failed, with failure characteristics consistent with metal 
fatigue.

The fan in a jet engine is a piece of high speed rotating equipment, and contains a lot of kinetic energy (energy of 
motion). If there is a failure, pieces of metal shrapnel can cause major damage, and can travel a long distance. Many 
process plants also contain high speed rotating equipment – for example, compressors, centrifuges, and centrifugal 
extractors. This equipment could be subject to a failure similar to this jet engine failure. Process safety management 
systems must include systems to identify these hazards, and ensure proper design, fabrication, inspection, and 
maintenance of high energy equipment.
Photos taken from reference:  US National Transportation Safety Board Investigative Update, Southwest Airlines Flight 1380 Engine Failure, DCA18MA142 SWA1380 
INVESTIGATIVE UPDATE (https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/SWA1380-DCA18MA142-Investigative-Update.pdf).  

1

Did You Know?

2
What Can You Do?

3

We often think of process safety as being about containment 

 With your co-workers, make a list of all of the 

and control of hazardous material. This is an important part of 
process safety, but control of hazardous energy is also important. 
Some examples of hazardous energy that you might have in your 
plant include:
 Kinetic energy from high speed rotating equipment such as 

pumps, compressors, fans, centrifuges, or centrifugal 
extractors.

 Electrical energy
 High pressure, such as compressed air and other gases, or 

high pressure steam

 High temperature
 Potential energy from gravity – for example, the failure of a 
large tank full of liquid can cause major damage even if the 
liquid is not hazardous. In 1919, the failure of a molasses tank 
in Boston sent a wave of molasses 15 feet (5 m) high through 
part of the city resulting in 21 fatalities and over 150 injuries 
(May 2007 Beacon). 

hazardous energy sources in your plant. Be sure 
that you all understand the operating, inspection, 
and preventive maintenance systems in place to 
manage the risk associated with those hazards.

 Understand your role in ensuring that the 

hazardous energy safeguards in your plant are 
robust and functioning properly.

 Many high speed machines have vibration sensors 

with alarms or shutdown interlocks. Make sure 
these are not bypassed without following your 
plant Temporary Management of Change (MOC) 
procedures.

 If you are responsible for inspecting or 

maintaining hazardous energy equipment, follow 
all of the specified procedures diligently, and 
report any concerns that you have to your 
management and technical staff.

Process safety – control hazardous material AND energy!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

