 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceCCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceCENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2004. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSSponsored by CCPSSupportersWhat Happened?What Happened?Why did this Happen?Why did this Happen?What you can doWhat you can doPSID members see: Free SearchŠMOC and Free SearchŠVacuum ColumnThoroughly Evaluate ChangesŠKnow, Don™t Guess the Consequences!This small stripper was used to separate a light solvent from a heavier oil. Annually, the unit was shut down for internal inspection and cleaning. The practice had been to allow 24 hours for cooling down before starting maintenance work and opening the stripper.This time, the shutdown team decided to shorten the cool down period to 12 hours to reduce the time the unit would be out of service. The unit was shut down, allowed to cool for 12 hours and then the stripper was opened. Almost immediately, smoke began to come out of the open manway. There were no visible flames and no one was injured, but it was obvious that something had caught on fire.A Long Standing Procedure was Changed withoutUnderstanding ALL Consequences!ŁIt was believed that the 24 hour cool down period was to protect workers from hot surfaces. No one understood that those same hot surfaces might cause residual solvent or oil to catch on fire.ŁOxygen was introduced in to the vessel before the temperature had dropped below the autoignition point of some of the residual materials. This completed the fire triangle by adding oxygen to the fuel and heat already present.Unapproved Procedure Change = FireŁUnderstand the reason for each processing and maintenance preparation step. Don™t assumeŠKNOW! ŁKnow how and when to use your facility™s management of change (MOC) process. Ask to be sure that all changes have been reviewed and approved before taking action.ŁThe process safety information should contain autoignition temperatures if the process operates above them. If your process does, make sure you are well below those temperatures before allowing air to enter. Equipment containing chemicals must be cooled below the autoignition temperature before opening!PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelNovember 2004Visit the CSB document on MOC at: http://www.csb.gov/safety_publications/docs/moc082801.pdfThis edition is also available in German, French, Spanish, Portuguese and Chinese. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.