 We are finishing our celebration of 10 years of the Process Safety Beaconwith a ﬁFind the Problemﬂ contest. Look at the pictures in this Beaconand identify as many hazardous situations (problems) as you can. There is at least one unique safety problem in Pictures 1 through 6, and Picture 7 has more than 10 (identify at least 6 to qualify as a contest winner). Not all are ﬁprocess hazardsﬂ Œyou will find things like tripping hazards. We will select three winners at random from correct responses, and winners will receive a free CCPS book of their choice, subject to availability. Responses must be received by Midnight US Eastern Time on Nov. 30, 2012 to be eligible for the prizes.Complete rules, and a form to submit answers, can be found at http://www.aiche.org/ccps/beaconcontest. Our answers will appear in the January 2013 Beacon. You will also be asked to participate in a short survey to help us understand how the Beaconis being used, so we can better serve our readers. We realize that some of the pictures are small in this Beacon, so you will also find bigger pictures on line at the contest web address.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelAlways be alert and look for hazardous situations!AIChE © 2012. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Can you find the safety problem?The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsNovember 2012http://www.chilworthglobal.com/en/Bellows sealed pressure relief valve234567Rupture diskReliefvalveReliefvalveThis issue sponsored by1Protected process equipment36% hydrochloric acid