 Did you know?http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat passive safety equipment do you have in your plant?July 2010AIChE ©2010. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Passive Safety EquipmentSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersThe Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.ŁEven though passive safety equipment does not have any sensors or moving parts, it does require ongoing inspection and maintenance. As shown in the previous three issues of the Beacon, insulation can be removed from equipment or it can deteriorate or be damaged; fireproofing can be damaged or removed; dike walls can have holes in them; and other types of passive safety equipment can deteriorate or be damaged.ŁIt is easy to forget about passive safety equipment, and to forget its importance for plant safety because it is just part of the plant background that you see as you go about your job, and you never notice its condition.April ŒInsulating cover on a May Œdamaged fireproofing June Œa hole in the wall of along bolt flangeless valve on a pipe bridge support column tank farm containment dikeCan you figure out what the April, May, and June 2010 issues of the Process Safety Beaconhave in common? All of them discuss a type of safety equipment that cangenerally be described as passive. Passive safety devices do not have to detect an unsafe condition or takeany action to perform their protective safety function. They have no sensors or moving parts. They do their job because of their construction Œfor example, the insulating characteristics and thickness of insulation or fireproofing, or the height and impervious material of construction of a dike wall.Here are some other examples of passive safety equipment which you might have in your plant: containment buildings for toxic materials, blast resistant control rooms or other buildings, blast resistant buildings for storage of potentially unstable materials such as organic peroxides, flame or detonation arrestors, insulation on storage tanks to limit heat exposure to a fire (standards for sizing relief valves for preventing overpressure of a storage tank engulfed in a fire allow credit for insulation on the tank).What can you do?ŁFind out what kind of passive safety equipment you have in your plant, and understand what safety function it performs.ŁFind out what must be done to maintain the passive safety equipment in your plant, and make sure these maintenance activities are done. Ask the people responsible for maintenance to explain the required maintenance.ŁLearn how to recognize damage to the passive safety equipment in your plant so you can report it and have it repaired.ŁPeriodically include inspection of passive safety equipment in your plant safety inspections.