 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceThis Edition Sponsored byPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelMarch 2004The sudden lack of electricity can be shocking. Know yThe sudden lack of electricity can be shocking. Know your role in outages!our role in outages!CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSWhat You Can Do to Keep Your Plant Safe in an Electrical OutageŁResearchResearchŠMake sure you know this–ŁFind out which instruments and equipment are on the emergency power system and which ones arenot. Know how to compensate for the controls that will be lost.ŁReview the operating instructions of the emergency power system. Know how long it is expected tooperate. If you have an emergency generator, make sure you have operatinginstructions, fuel andany other items needed for its operation. ŁKnow the power off-fail position of key instruments and equipment. Most are probably designed togo to a ﬁfail-safe position,ﬂ but for those that are not, you should have instructions on what to do.ŁPreplanPreplanŠThink through what you would do–ŁThink about the 1st, 2nd and 3rd things you would immediately doif the power failed. Make surethese things take care of potential emergencies and that the plant is safe.ŁKnow the calls and notifications that you need to make and know how to make them quickly.ŁReview your emergency response plan and emergency procedures for actions to be taken.ŁAccidents can occur during restart after a power outage. Knowthe safe restart procedure!ŁPracticePracticeŠWalk and talk through what needs to be done–ŁTalk with your co workers about what they would do and why. Develop a common plan forresponse to power failures. Know how to respond when all alarms sound at once.ŁIf you can, conduct or participate in power failure drills including the testing of emergencygenerators. If this is not possible, mentally walk through power failure actions.The Electricity just went off–The Electricity just went off–Is your plant safe ?Is your plant safe ?On August 14, 2003 shortly after 4:00 PM EDT, a massive power outage occurred in the northeastern U. S. and eastern Canada that affected about 50 million people. The cause and cure remain to be determined, but the effect was immediate and profound. Amid this disaster, one thing seemed to be missing. There were no catastrophic releases of toxic chemicals, major fires or explosions from chemical or petrochemical plants! Would your plant do as well?Would your plant do as well?http://www.iomosaic.comNortheast coast power failure areaThis edition is also available in Spanish, French and German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.