 As promised in the January 2009 Beacon, we will discuss another lesson from the incident reviewed in both the December 2008 and January 2009 issues of the Beacon. A fire started in a packagingarea while a 300-gallon portable steel tank (a ﬁtoteﬂ) was being filled with ethyl acetate. In previous Beacons, we discussed static electricity as an ignition source, the importance of bonding and grounding, andthe use of dip pipes or bottom loading for filling containers with flammable liquids. In this issue we will discuss another important lesson from the same incident.The consequence of this incident became much more severe because the initial fire spread to an adjacent flammable material storage warehouse. The wall separating the two areas was not fire-rated. Large non-fire-rated doors between the warehouse and packaging area were kept open, and were not equipped with self-closing mechanisms. Also there was no fire protection system (sprinklers or other fire suppression system) in the flammable material packaging area.Fill flammable liquid containers in properly designed areas!February 2009AIChE ©2009. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1372More lessons from fire while filling containersSponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Turkish, andVietnamese.ŁConduct flammable material container filling operations in areas which have been properly designed for this service. This would include, for example:ŁAdequate fire protection facilitiesŁSeparation of equipment, fire walls and fire rated doorsŁSpill containment.ŁProper electrical classification of all equipmentŁBe sure that there is proper spill containment around any containers which you are filling. The spill containment must be liquid tight, made of a material appropriate to contain the liquid being handled, and of sufficient size to contain a spill which could occur.ŁConduct a management of change review for any unusual operations which involve filling of containers in areas not originally designed for that purpose, and be sure to consider ignition source control, fire protection, and spill containment in this review.Spill containment is important whenever you are filling containers with any material, whether flammable or not. For flammable materials, containment helps to limit the area potentially impacted by a fire. And, for all materials containment keeps spills from getting into drains, sewers, surface water drainage, or onto uncontaminated soil. While improper spill containment was not identified as a factor in this particular incident, the incident is a reminder of why containment is important.A ReviewWe have done three Beacons (December 2008, January 2009, and this issue) on a single incident which occurred while filling containers with a flammable liquid. When filling containers or other vessels with flammable liquids, you should strongly consider these safe design features:Łbottom fillingŁgrounded/bonded equipmentŁspill containmentŁinert gas in vapor space (nitrogen or carbon dioxide, for example)Łliquid inlet velocity controlled until dip pipe coveredŁsome type of emergency shutoffŁsprinkler system, or other fire protection systemŁother features as required by codes and standards for safe handling of flammable liquids