 DOW RESTRICTED -For internal use onlyEquipment should operate the way you expect!PProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelJune 2006CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYAIChE ©2006. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319SSThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, sh, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, and Spanish, and Thai.Korean, Portuguese, and Spanish, and Thai.Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersIs this valve open?––. or closed?Many people would expect this valve to be closed -the position of the valve handle (in this case, a ﬁvalve wrenchﬂ) is perpendicular to the pipe. But close inspection of the valve position indicator shows it is parallel to the pipe, clearly indicating the valve is open! WHY? The valve wrench collar is square and can be positioned in two ways Œone with the valve wrench parallel to the valve position indicator and the other with the valve wrench perpendicular to the position indicator.This confusing setup was one cause of an incident which injured 6 people, resulted in 13 millionDid you know?Look for equipment that does not work the way you would expect. Have it modified! Pay special attention to confusing control displays, valve position indicators, equipment running status indicators and instrument displays.Local culture and/or practices can change the way things are ﬁexpectedﬂto appear. For example, some translations of this Beacon will read from right to left. If you use equipment manufactured in another country, it may not operate the way you expect it to Œit is also deserving of special attention.Take a few minutes to read the United States Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board case study on this incident. It will provide additional information as well as other causes for this incident.http://www.csb.govWhat can you do?People have expectations for how equipment will work based on what they see. It is critical that equipment align with these expectations to avoid setting traps for operators and mechanics.We may remember that a device works in an unusual manner when we have time to think about it. But, in an emergency or when we are distracted by other events, we forget. Then, we revert to our basic assumption that things work the way we expect them to. In this incident, a valve handle was perpendicular to a pipe, and people assumed it was closed.US dollars in damage, shut down a refinery for several months and required off site evacuations. Operations personnel used this valve to isolate a pump for maintenance and mistakenly believed the valve was closed. It was not! The result: release of a large quantity of flammable liquid at 150 psig (10 bar g) and 350 degrees F (175 degrees C), followed by an explosion and fire.Actual Position and flowThe valve wrench collar Valve WrenchValve Wrench CollarPosition Indicator