 You will recognize Picture 1 from the November 2012 and January 2013 issues of the Beacon. It is an obvious example of badly supported piping. But sometimes problems with inadequate support of piping and other equipment are not so easy to see.Picture 2ŒThe steel supporting the pipes has bent, possibly because the weight of the pipes is more than the steel can support. Perhaps this was a result of a change Œwas a second pipe added without considering the design of the supporting steel?Picture 3 ŒThe pipe has moved horizontally and the pipe support stand has moved out of the support shoe.Picture 4ŒLook closely Œthe steel supports are not touching the ground. They are hanging from the pipes rather than supporting them!Picture 5ŒSomebody has cut out a section of the structural steel to make room for a valve!Pipes and equipment which are not properly supported will be subject to stress, vibration, or other problems. This can cause leaks, or even a complete collapse of piping or equipment. As you work in your plant, look for problems with poorly supported equipment, excessive vibration, or other issues. A good general rule -if it doesn't look like it did on the day it was installed, there might be a problem! Report problems to your management, and follow up to make sure the problems are corrected.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelSupport your pipes and equipment!AIChE © 2013. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.What is supporting your equipment?The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsFebruary 201312354This issue sponsored bywww.acutech-consulting.com