www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Are  your signs a nd la be ls c onfusing?

March 2013

This issue sponsored by

The picture at the right, from the November 2012 “Find the 
Problem” Beacon contest, shows a  group of pumps which look 
exactly the same. In the picture they do not appear to be labeled 
in any visible way. If you were told that one of the pumps had 
been prepared for mechanical work, how would you be sure you 
were working on the right pump?

Lack of labeling can be a safety problem, and poor or 

confusing labels or information signs can be even worse. The 
pictures below are examples of confusing labels or signs taken 
from process plants and everyday life . Do you have confusing 
signs or labels in your plant?

START

STOP

Similar labels on these 
pipes contributed to 
unloading the wrong 
material into a storage 
tank. A chemical reaction 
resulted, releasing a 
toxic gas which injured 6 
people. See the April 
2012 Beacon.

What can you do?

(cid:206) Look for unlabeled equipment, missing labels, or 
damaged labels which you can not read. Repair the labels 
if you are able to do so, or report it to somebody who can 
fix the problem.
(cid:206) Look for confusing labels or signs, like some of those 
in the pictures, and have them fixed. 
(cid:206) Make sure that the labeling and identification of 
equipment in the plant is the same as the identification 
used in operating procedures, maintenance procedures, 
emergency procedures, and other plant documents.
(cid:206) Don’t create confusion by modifying labels using hand 
written notes or other temporary labels. If a label needs to 
be corrected, use a proper label, and consider doing a 
management of change review.
(cid:206) Be consistent in using names or acronyms for 
chemicals in your plant. For example, “MMA” can mean 
“Methyl Methacrylate” in one plant, “Monomethylamine” 
in a different plant, and perhaps something completely 
different in another plant. Always use the correct  
chemical name for a material. Be sure that everybody in 
your plant knows what the labels mean! 

Use clear labels and signs for safety!

AIChE © 2013. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, 

Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.

