 ŁUnderstand hazardous area (electrical) classification for your plant (see the October 2013 Beacon).ŁRemember that many common portable electronic devices such as cell phones, digital cameras, tablet computers, and laptops are not rated for use in hazardous areas. Follow your plant™s policies and permit systems for use of these devices.ŁBe aware that a hot surface, such as a hot pipe or a hot motor, can be an ignition source, particularly if you are handling a material with a low autoignitiontemperature. Several Process Safety Beacons have discussed specific examples of the likely ignition sources for major fires and explosions. You can access ﬁread onlyﬂ copies of these Beacons on line at http://sache.org/beacon/products.asp:What can you do?Control ignition sources in your plant!The best way to prevent fires and flammable vapor explosions, either inside or outside process piping and equipment, is to avoid creating a flammable mixture. Inside process equipment, this means controlling the ﬁfuelﬂ and ﬁoxygenﬂ sides of the fire triangle (left). We must also prevent the release of flammable or combustible gases, liquids, or dusts (fuel) from process equipment into the surrounding environment, where oxygen will always behttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing Personnel©AIChE 2014. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Ignition SourcesThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsAugust 2014This issue sponsored bywww.iomosaic.comŁUnderstand and strictly follow your plant™s work permit procedures for hot work, electrical work, and any other activity that could create ignition sources in hazardous areas. ŁFollow your emergency procedures in case of a flammable release. For example, make sure that hot work is stopped and vehicles are shut off.ŁLook for potential ignition sources such as faulty electrical wiring, improper equipment in hazardous areas, or other issues as you go about your job. Report problems and make sure they are fixed.present in the air.However, we must also recognize that our equipment and operating procedures can fail and a flammable atmosphere can result from a failure. So, we must always work to eliminate ignition sources (ﬁheatﬂ in the fire triangle) in any place where there is the potential for a flammable atmosphere. The pictures to the right show some examples of ignition sources that we need to control. Do you have any of these in your plant? Can you think of any other possible ignition sources in your plant?1234765Some examples of ignition sources: (1) static electricity, (2) vehicle, (3) welding, (4) open flame, (5) grinding, (6) faulty electrical wiring, (7) a furnace, (8) pyrophoric or decomposing material Process Safety Beacon DateIgnition SourceApril 2003Hot activated carbon absorberJuly 2003Static electricitySeptember 2004Truck motorDecember 2008Static electricityOctober 2009Truck motorOctober 2013Sparks from electrical equipment 8