 had ever received on his shift. He directed the truck driver to the unloading station for ferrous sulfate, where the truck is shown in the diagram. The shift supervisor did not verify the identity of the chemical in the truck, although the shipping papers did properly identify the contents as sodium hydrosulfide. The supervisor signed the shipping papers without reading them and left the area. No plant employees remained in the unloading area.The truck driver connected his truck to a hose which was connected to the ferrous sulfate storage tank as shown in the photographs. He began to unload the sodium hydrosulfide solutioninto the ferrous sulfate tank. Unfortunately, sodium hydrosulfide and ferrous sulfate react to form hydrogen sulfide,a highly toxic gas. Shortly after the unloading began, a plant employee in the basement of the building noticed a pungentodor and lost consciousness. He regained consciousness and made his way outside where he got help from other employees, who called emergency response personnel. They found the truck driver unconscious inside the building, and he was pronounced dead at the scene. Investigators determined that the driver had been overcome by hydrogen sulfide gas.Never add any chemical to a vessel without confirming that it isthe right material!March 2009AIChE ©2009. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Fatality caused by unloading the wrong chemical into a storage tank!Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.ŁALWAYS positively confirm the identity of any chemical which you add to any vessel. Check the identity of the material, double check it, and then check it again before beginning the chemical transfer!ŁNEVER assume that you know the contents of any truck, railroad car, drum, or other raw material container which arrives at your plant without carefully checking all labels, vehicle placards, and shipping papers.ŁFollow all of your plant™s procedures for identifying materials, which might include checking shipping papers, letters of analysis, or sampling and testing incoming materials. Ensure that all unloading personnel are trained and understand procedures. If unloading procedures do not exist at your facility, communicate the deficiency to your supervision.ŁRemember that the consequences of accidently mixing incompatible chemicals can be severe Œincluding potential for explosion or generation of highly toxic materials.ŁBe aware of potential hazardous reactions between chemicals stored at your facility. Consider use of special fittings and unloading connections to make unloading mistakes more difficult,helping to prevent them.ŁMake sure that all unloading connections and pipes, as well as all storage tanks, are clearly labeled. A truck of sodium hydrosulfide solution arrived at a factory at about 3:30 AM, and was to be unloaded to a storage tank in the area near the top center of the diagram at the right. The truck driver had never been to the plant before, and asked the plant shift supervisor for assistance. Theshift supervisor had been told to expect a chemical shipment, and assumed that the chemical would be ferrous sulfate, which is the only chemical that he