This issue sponsored by

www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

What if your process is acting differently?

September 2018

A runaway reaction incident described in the August 2018 Beacon occurred in a batch reactor as a result of 

failure to agitate during reactant addition. During normal operation, the reactor always needed cooling to 
maintain the required temperature. The runaway batch did not need cooling, but rather required heating! 
Clearly there was something different, but nobody noticed or acted upon the abnormal behavior.

The 2005 Texas City refinery explosion is another example of not responding to abnormal process 
conditions. In this incident, a distillation column was overfilled and over-pressurized (Pictures 1 & 2). 
Flammable hydrocarbons were released from a stack (Picture 3), and the vapor cloud ignited. Material was 
being fed to the column, while nothing was being removed (Picture 4), and the level instrument indicated a 
decreasing column level. The level instrument had not failed, but was operating beyond its design range. The
March 2007 Beacon (www.sache.org) explains the 
incorrect level reading.

In another case, a batch specialty chemical process 
included a batch distillation step to remove a reaction 
by-product. This normally took about 10 hours, and the 
distillation was determined to be complete when the 
temperature at the top of the column reached a 
specified value. The temperature sensor failed during 
one batch. The column top temperature indication 
incorrectly reached the completion temperature in about 
15 minutes. The process continued to the next step. 
Nobody questioned the unusual behavior. Fortunately 
there was no safety consequence, but the batch had to 
be discarded.

1

3

2

4

Did you know?

 When you work in a plant, you learn a lot about 
how it normally behaves. You get to know how 
long various process steps take, how long it takes to 
heat up a vessel, how much heating or cooling is 
required for a particular step, what happens to the 
level in various vessels when you transfer material 
from one place to another, what color materials are 
in a sight glass, what the plant normally sounds like, 
what it looks like, and hundreds of other things that 
you see and experience as you go about your daily 
work.

 If you observe something that appears to be 

different from your past experience, it is likely that 
there is something which has changed in your plant. 
It is possible that the change is hazardous.

Pictures from US Chemical Safety Board video about the March 2005 Texas City incident.

What can you do?

 Be observant as you do your job. Learn how your 
plant normally behaves, and look for differences.

 If you observe any kind of unusual behavior in 

your plant, report it to supervision, management, 
and technical staff. Work with them to understand 
what has caused the unusual behavior. 
Understand if the behavior is a symptom of a 
hazardous condition or a change in the integrity 
status of your equipment.

 Read the December 2015 Beacon 

(www.sache.org) for more examples of hazardous 
incidents which were avoided because somebody 
reported an abnormal situation, and some 
examples of unusual things to look for as you 
work.

Report and investigate unusual process behavior!

©AIChE 2018. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

