 What can you do?Pay attention to details in your job•they are important!There was an exothermic reaction in a drum of radioactive wastematerial in a nuclear waste repository. The drum ruptured, releasingsmallamountsof radiation, exposing other waste drums to elevatedtemperature, and contaminating 20 workers with low levels ofradiation. Other drums containing similar waste material may also bein danger of rupture. The facility had to be shut down and therecovery cost is expected to be several hundred million dollars.A chemical reaction occurred in the drum, which contained acidicwaste material and oxidizing chemicals including nitrate salts, aswell as an organic absorbent. This mixture can react to generate heatand pressure.While a final determination of causes has not been made,newspaper reports indicate that a typographical error in a revision toa facility policy may have resulted in the use of the wrongabsorbent! The revised policy specifically stated that anorganicabsorbent should be used, when it should have specified the use ofaninorganicabsorbent (a clay based absorbent). The error was notrecognized and the absorbent was changed, resulting in the incident.Details matter! Those two letters, •i† and •n,† make a hugedifference in the characteristics of the absorbent!http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing Personnel©AIChE 2015.All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for anycommercial purposewithoutexpress written consent ofAIChE isstrictlyprohibited. Contactus atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 646-495-1371.Details Matter in Process Safety!The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Afrikaans, Chinese,Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew,Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean,Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai,Turkish, andVietnamese.www.aiche.org/ccpsMarch 2015This issue sponsored bywww.iomosaic.comðvSmall diameter tubing connecting a pressure gauge to process pipingruptured releasing flammable material which ignited. The resulting firedestroyed a plant (October 2012Beacon). The detail‡a few inches ofsmall tubing in thousands of feet of pipe!ðvAn ungrounded instrument probe in a duct built up a static electric charge.The duct was air conveying a combustible solid powder. A spark ignited adust explosion. The detail‡a single ungrounded conductive piece ofequipment out of thousands of components that were properly grounded!ðvThere was a significant fire on an offshore oil platform when a small hosefailed releasing methanol, which ignited. The hose was leaking and hadbeen repaired with duct tape (July 2007Beacon)! The detail‡a singlesmall hose leak on a platform containing large piping and equipment!ðvMany explosions have resulted from running a centrifugal pump withboth the suction and discharge valves closed, allowing temperature andpressure to build up in the pump (October 2002 and August 2013Beacons). The detail‡one or two valves out of hundreds in the plantwere in the wrong position!Some Other ExamplesðvWhatever your job‡operations, maintenance,supervision, engineering,management‡pay attention tothe details in your work. Thereare no unimportant details inprocess safety. You neverknow which apparently minordetail can initiate a majorevent, so you have to payattention to all of them!ðvIf you are asked to review aprocedure or other processsafety information, reallyreview it. Don…t regard thereview as a formality, go overit carefully.