 On an offshore oil platform, operators were transferring methanol from a portable chemical transporter tank connected by a hose toa storage tank. When the tank was lifted by a crane to gravity feed the storage tank, methanol began spraying out from a hole in the hose. The methanol ignited on the top deck. Methanol that was sprayed over the side also ignited by the hot exhaust of a compressor located immediately below the transfer point on the second deck. The fire was compounded by the breaking of the transfer tank™s sight glass when a crewman attempted to kick the valve closed. The fire spread as relief valves on two other chemical transport tanks opened.After twenty-two 30-pound hand-held chemical fire extinguishers, two 125-pound wheeled fire extinguisher units, and the firewater system were used, the fires on both decks were contained. One man received second-degree burns. After the fires were extinguished, it was discovered that the hose used to feed methanol from the transporter to the storage tank was split and had been repaired with duct tape prior to the operation!Check your equipment before you start the job!ŁNEVER make temporary or unauthorized repairs on equipment in hazardous material service without a management of change review by qualified personnel.ŁALWAYS inspect equipment before using it. If there is any signof damage, corrosion, improper repair, or any other defect, replace the equipment before you start the job.ŁAvoid transferring flammable products near ignition sources such as compressors.July 2007AIChE ©2007. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319Fire Caused by Hose Repaired with Duct Tape!Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersWhat You Can Do?http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Persian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.and Thai.