http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Has anybody seen our process safety information (PSI)??

September 2010

Sponsored by 
Sponsored by 

CCPS 
CCPS 

Supporters
Supporters

1

2

What is Process Safety Information (PSI)? It is the information 

about the process chemistry, equipment and technology of your 
plant. It is collected from many places inside and outside your 
company: research and development, engineering, operations, and 
also suppliers of raw materials, process technology, and equipment. 
As an operator or maintenance person, your  first exposure to the 
PSI may have been at a Process Hazard Analysis (PHA). The PSI 
was that stack of drawings, manuals, documents, and books that 
provided information to the PHA team. PSI is also frequently used 
in Management of Change (MOC) reviews. It is important to 
understand the existing system so you can evaluate the 
consequences of proposed changes. For example, a new valve must 
meet the specifications for the pipe where it is installed. That
means the valve, gaskets, bolts, and other components all need to 
be correct. How do you know? Verify them according to the piping
specifications in the PSI from the plant engineering design. 

Some other important examples of PSI include piping and 

instrumentation drawings (1), hazardous area classification 
drawings (2), and the reports from process hazard analyses (3), 
management of change reviews, incident investigations, personal 
protective equipment requirements, operating and maintenance 
procedures, and others.

3

1.
2.
3.

A piping and instrumentation drawing (P&ID)
A hazardous area classification drawing
Part of the documentation of a Process 
Hazard Analysis (PHA) study

What can you do?

PSI is essential to safe plant operation and maintenance, but it is valuable only if it is correct, up to date,  and 
used. And you must know where to find it! Here are some examples of things you can do to ensure that the PSI 
for your plant is correct, and we are sure you can think of many other examples:
• If asked to go into the plant and update piping drawings, take that job seriously. A valve not shown on the 
drawing may be the difference in preventing a spill – you can’t close it if you don’t know it is there!
• If you find that an operation is normally done differently from the written operating procedure, tell your 
supervisor, so that either the procedure is modified, or the operation is done as required by existing procedures.
• If you find an error on a drawing, tell your supervisor or plant engineer so it can be corrected.
• If you are trying to use a drawing and there are too many corrections, tell your supervisor or an engineer that 
the corrections make the drawing confusing, and a new drawing is needed.
• Remember that control system documentation is part of the PSI and must be updated when changes are made.

Where is your Process Safety Information?

AIChE © 2010. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged.  However, reproduction 
for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited.   Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, 

Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Tamil, Thai, Telugu, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

