 Understand the fire and explosion hazards of the materials in your plant. Don™t forget about natural gas, propane, and other fuels!When purging equipment and piping (for example, when preparing equipment for maintenance), make sure flammable materials are vented to a safe location, away from personnel andignition sources. Follow your plant procedures for safely purging flammable materials.Whenever possible, purge flammable vapors and gases to collection systems which go to flares, scrubbers, or other treatment systems. Avoid purging indoors, and conduct a thorough hazard analysis to identify job specific precautions to protect personnel if this is unavoidable.Use flammable gas detectors to monitor areas where flammable materials may be vented or purged.In June 2009 there was a major explosion at a meat processing plant in Garner, North Carolina, USA. A new natural gas line had been installed to supply fuel to a water heater. The new pipe was being purged with natural gas to remove air. The natural gas from the purge was released into a building intermittently over a 2 ½hour period. An explosive mixture formed and ignited. The explosion destroyed the building, killed 4 workers, injured 67 people, and caused a release of 18,000 pounds of ammonia. Most people would recognize natural gas as a fuel which could cause an explosion. But remember that the release of any flammable gas or volatile flammable liquidfrom piping or equipment has the potential to cause a similar incident.Many manufacturing processes use flammable gases or liquids, and most factories, offices, and laboratories use natural gas, propane, or other flammable fuels. In preparation for maintenance, start-up, or other work, it may be necessary to purge the flammable process material or fuel from the pipes or equipment. This incident reminds us of the importance of purging that flammable material to a safe place where it can be safely contained, treated, or dispersed. Never allow flammable materials to accumulate in a building, room, or any other confined space.http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelIt doesn™t take much released flammable vapor in a room to cause a big explosion!May 2011AIChE ©2011. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Flammable material release inside building causes explosion!The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish,Telugu, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.This issue sponsored byA small amount of flammable gas or vapor can create an explosive vapor cloud in a building or room. For example, it only takes about 11 pounds (5 kg) of propane to create a flammable mixture in a room 20 ft. long, 20 ft. wide, and 11 ft. high (6 m. x 6 m. x 3.5 m). The 11 pounds (5kg) of propane packs as much energy as 110 pounds (50 kg) of TNT! Any closed space such as a building or room can allow a released flammable material to accumulate to an explosive concentration. What can you do?Do you know?www.chilworth.com