www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

Surrounded by warning signs?

This issue sponsored by

www.iomosaic.com

May 2019

The two photographs on the right were 

taken at an airport. The device is a personnel 
lift (elevator), used to raise workers to a task. 
There are 24 warning labels on this platform. 
How many do you think the operator reads? 
No doubt all these warning signs have their 
point and serve a good purpose. But, one may 
wonder if so many warnings are actually 
distracting, or so overwhelming that nobody 
pays attention to them. 

Do we ever get overloaded with 

communications? Yes! In the process 
industries it could be that warning sign that 
you walk by and don’t bother to read, or the 
caution in a procedure that you don’t notice.

Did you know?

What can you do?

 Warning signs are posted to remind 

 Always read the warning signs before entering a process area 

people about specific equipment 
and process hazards in an area.

or using a piece of equipment, to remind yourself of what 
should be done, and also of what should not be done.

 Warning signs may also specify 

 Read and understand the safety and PPE requirements in 

things that cannot be safely done in 
a process area or with a piece of 
equipment.

operating procedures, maintenance procedures, or work permit 
documents. Follow these requirements, and ask for help from 
your supervisor if you do not understand the requirements.

 Signs in a process area often list 

requirements for personal 
protective equipment (PPE) and 
other safety information. Warnings 
and PPE requirements may also be 
included in operating and 
maintenance procedures, or in 
work permit documents.

 If there are too many signs or 

procedure warnings, some may be 
overlooked and an incident may 
occur.

 If you think that a written procedure or a signboard contains 
too many warnings which may distract readers from what is 
essential, report this to your supervisor.

 Are signs in the right places and in the right number? Are they 

effective reminders? Are the signs accurate?

 Suggest opportunities to improve warning signs or warnings in 

procedures. For example, there are 24 warning labels for the 
platform in the picture above. Could some of these 24 warning 
labels be combined? Grouped? Prioritized? Are they all 
necessary?

 Read the May 2013 Beacon for more examples of poor signs.

We need warning signs – and they must be to the point!

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

