 Process Safety Beacon CCPS An AIChE Industry Technology Alliance Messages for Manufacturing Personnel LAYERS OF PROTECTIONYYYooouuu NNNEEEEEEDDD TTThhheeemmm HERE™S WHAT HAPPENED–– During a non-routine procedure, materials were transferred into a vessel. A number of items were present (i.e., ﬁlayers of protectionﬂ) to prevent vessel damage, including: A high pressure alarm (in this case, the alarm was acknowledged earlier when it was assumed to be caused by a faulty instrument) A pressure control system which allows pressure to be vented to another system in the area (in this case, this ﬁsecond systemﬂ was out of service), and A pressure relief/vacuum system which vented to the atmosphere (this system contained a flame arrestor which was found to be plugged). The net result of all these failures was a ruptured roof on the tank What can I do to protect equipment? NEVER assume an alarm is functioning improperly -if an alarm becomes a nuisance, take immediate steps to have it repaired; Review alarm status for equipment early in your shift, understand why ALL alarms are present; Pressure/vacuum relief valves are often the LAST line of defense which prevents vessel damage, maintenance systems must be in place to properly test these devices; Pluggage in vent lines must be managed - if a line has a tendency to plug, cleaning frequencies should be adjusted to maintain the line in a ﬁcleanﬂ state; and Non-routine operations often have fewer or weaker layers of protection when compared with ﬁroutineﬂ operations, all items preventing equipment damage are especially critical. What do layers of protection accomplish? A well designed facility includes multiple items of protection for equipment; These frequently include a number of the following: operator monitoring, procedures, alarms, interlocks, pressure rated equipment and relief/vacuum valves, and In most cases, multiple systems must fail before vessel damage occurs March 2002AIChE © 2002. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps@aiche.org or 212-591-7319.