 In December 2008, a graduate student was working in a university research laboratory. She was attempting to transfer approximately 2 oz. (60 ml) of t-Butyl Lithium from one laboratory container to another. T-Butyl Lithium is a pyrophoricmaterial Œit ignites spontaneously when exposed to air. The initial investigation of the incident found that the student had not been properly trained on the transfer procedure, and was not wearing the proper clothing and personal protective equipment. The material was released, splashed onto the student, caught fire, and set her clothing on fire. She suffered serious burns, and died of her injuries several weeks later.When you work in a plant which contains large quantities of flammable or toxic hazardous materials, you may underestimate the hazards of materials which are handled in small quantities. Nearly all plants require that samples be takenEven a small amount of a hazardous chemical is dangerous!August 2009AIChE ©2009. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.Never underestimate the hazard!Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportershttp://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspxMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelWhat can you do?The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese.ŁKnow the hazards of allchemicals you work with, even if you only use small quantities.Don™t forget any chemicals that are only used in small amounts in your plant quality control laboratories.ŁRespect all hazardous materials, even if you handle them in small quantities.ŁMake sure that you are fully trained on all plant sampling operations, and on how to use any special equipment required to safely take and transport samples.ŁUnderstand what kind of protective clothing and personal protective equipment is required to protect yourself from the hazardous materials you work with, and always use allof the required protective clothing and equipment, including when working in the laboratory.ŁKnow where to find, and how to use, emergency equipment such assafety showers and eye wash stations when you are handling chemicals.ŁAlways use the required containers for taking samples, and proper sample carriers for transporting samples.ŁWhen you take a sample to a laboratory, make sure that you follow procedures to ensure that it is received by qualified laboratory personnel, and that they know what is in the sample container, including proper labeling.and transported to a laboratory for analysis. Many plants have in-plant laboratories where plant operators carry out quality control tests. These operations involve small quantities of materials. The laboratory tests may also require the use of chemicals which are not handled anywhere elsein the plant, and you may not be as familiar with the hazards of these materials. Remember that even a small quantity of a hazardous material can cause serious injury, damage, or even a fatality.