 CCPAn AIChE IndustryTechnology AllianceSponsored by CCPSSupportersPProcess rocess SSafety afety BBeaconeaconhttp: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelDecember 2003What Allowed this to Happen?What Allowed this to Happen?CENTER FOR CHEMICAL PROCESS SAFETYWhat You Can DoWhat You Can DoRecognize a piping ﬁChristmas Treeﬂ for what it really isŠa potential trap waiting for you to make a valving alignment mistake.Don™t accept just ﬁmaking doﬂ with what™s there. Make sure that coworkers know the correct operating procedures and keep communications flowing.LabelŠLabelŠLabel!Label!Label all valves and pipes so that their function can be determined easily and quickly. AIChE ©2003. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319This edition is also available in Spanish, French and German. Contact CCPS at ccps_beacon@aiche.orgfor information.SSAbove are three pictures of ﬁChristmas trees.ﬂ The center one is what we expect to see this time of year. In the chemical industry we see the other (piping) ﬁChristmas treesﬂ year-round at work. These ﬁChristmas treesﬂ are actually concentrated concoctions ofpiping, valves, instruments tubing, gages and fittings. In many cases, these systems were never really ﬁdesigned,ﬂ they just evolvedŠone valve, one gage, and one instrument at a time. When the changes were originally made in the field, they seemed to make sense; but as time went on, they grewin to a bigger and bigger messŠa dangerous mess! So, What happened?So, What happened?In the case on the left, an operator added an incorrect gas toa still by mistakenly opening the wrong valve in the Christmas Tree. Fortunately, this mistake only killed the reaction and no damage was done. But just think what might have happened if an other incompatible chemical had been added .Simply Enjoy Christmas Trees at home, but Analyze them at work !Simply Enjoy Christmas Trees at home, but Analyze them at work !The CCPS Process Safety Beacon wishes you a Happy Holiday seasonThe CCPS Process Safety Beacon wishes you a Happy Holiday season! ! The real problem is that the Management of Change (MOC) process did not work very well. Operator usability was not considered and the PHA did not recognize the human factors issue--visual confusion added by the changes. GasSteamTrees, Trees, Confusing TreesTrees, Trees, Confusing Trees