 Did you know?http: //www.aiche.org/ccps/safetybeacon.htmMessages for Manufacturing PersonnelSeptember 2006AIChE ©2006. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for the purpose of resale by anyone other than CCPS is strictly prohibited. Contact us atccps_beacon@aiche.orgor 212-591-7319The Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, EngliThe Beacon is usually available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, sh, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Thai.Overfilling Tanks ŒWhat Happened?What can you do?On Sunday December 11, 2005, gasoline (petrol) was being pumped into a storage tank at the Buncefield Oil Storage Depot in Hertfordshire, England. At about 1:30 AM a stock check of the tanks showed nothing abnormal. From about 3 AM, the level gauge in one of the tanks recorded no change in reading, even though flow was continuing at a rate of about 550 cu. meters/hour (2400 US gallons/minute). Calculations show that the tank would have been full at about 5:20 AM, and that it would then overflow. Pumping continued and the excess gasoline overflowed from the top of the tank and cascaded down the sides, forming a liquid pool and a cloud of flammable gasoline vapor. At about 6:00 AM the cloud ignited and the first explosion occurred, followed by additional explosions and a fire which engulfed 20 storage tanks. Fortunately there were no fatalities, but 43 people wereIf you are pumping material, be sure you know where it is going!Sponsored by Sponsored by CCPS CCPS SupportersSupportersOverfilling of process vessels has been one of the causes of a number of serious incidents in the oil and chemical industries in recent years Œfor example, the explosion at an oil refinery in Texas City, Texas in March 2005.The tank involved in this incident had an independent high level alarm and interlock, but it did not work Œthe cause of the failure is still under investigation.A spill of flammable material such as gasoline can form a dense flammable vapor cloud which can grow and spread at ground level until it finds an ignition source, which can cause the cloud to explode.When you transfer material, make sure that you know where it is going.When you are pumping into a tank, ifthe level or weight indicator in that tank does not increase as you would expect, stop the transfer and find out what is happening.Make sure that all safety alarms and interlocks are tested at the frequency recommended by the plant process safety management procedures.If you have alarms and interlocks which are not regularly tested, ask if they are safety critical and should be on a regular testing program.Read the reports about this incident at http://www.buncefieldinvestigation.gov.ukinjured. 2000 people were evacuated, there was significant damage to property in the area, and a major highway was closed. The fires burned for several days, destroying most of the site and releasing large clouds of black smoke which impacted the environment over a large area.Photograph courtesy of Royal Chiltern Air Support UnitPhoto courtesy of Royal Chiltern Air Support UnitPhoto courtesy of Hertfordshire Constabulary