Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 08  
 

CAUGHT BETWEEN INCIDENT RESULTS IN FIRST AID INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  rigging  down,  the  crew  was  preparing  to  disassemble  the  top  drive  track.    An  employee  was  to  be 
hoisted  to  the  crown  to  verify  positioning  and  assist  the  carriage  attachment  to  the  top  drive  track.    To 
accomplish his task, the employee needed to be hoisted up the mast on the driller’s side.  After reaching the 
board area, the employee did not clear his foot from the approaching girt.  His foot was caught between the 
girt,  which  subsequently  pulled  his  boot  off  before  freeing  his  foot  from  the  girt.    This  resulted  in  minor 
swelling and discomfort to the employee’s foot, but the consequence for injury was much greater.    
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The injured employee did not clear his feet from the approaching girt while being hoisted up the driller’s 

side of the mast. 

personnel.   

•  The  injured  employee  was  not  utilizing  the  tension  limiter  per  company  policy  for  the  hoisting  of 

•  Neither  the  tool  pusher  nor  the  injured  employee  verified  the  new  employee  running  the  hoist  had  the 

amount of training and experience required for running such a hoist while hoisting personnel. 

•  The  tool  pusher  was  on  the  rig  floor  during  this  procedure  but  was  distracted  by  another  job  being 

performed at the same time; he was not directly supervising the lift. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  To  verify  positioning,  assist  the  carriage  attachment  to  the  top  drive  track,  and  to  complete  this  task 
safer, the company encourages all of its employees to complete this task by climbing the derrick ladder 
to the crown while being 100% tied off.  
If an employee is to be hoisted, the company now requires employees to be hoisted up the center of the 
mast  and  travel  along  the  length  of  a  guide  cable  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  catching  any  body  part 
between a girt or any other obstructions throughout the mast. 

• 

•  All  rig  personnel  were  reminded  that  while  a  person  is  being  hoisted,  all  other  tasks  must  stop  and 

everyone on the rig floor should assist with supervising the lift to insure the safety of the hoisted person. 

•  All rig personnel were reminded to utilize the tension limiter every time a crew member is being hoisted 

throughout the mast, no exception. 

•  The  company  reminded  all  rig  managers  that  until  it  is  verified  that  a  new  employee,  no  matter  the 
experience level, shows the required skill and knowledge to safely operate a hoist,  that employee is to 
never operate a hoist during personnel hoisting operations. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2013 

