Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 12 
 

TOP DRIVE IMPACTS STABBING BOARD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  rig  crew  was  running  9-5/8”  casing  when  it  became  necessary  to  lay  down  a  joint  that  had  damaged 
threads.  The joint was lowered into the V-door using the top drive and single joint elevators.  As the top drive 
passed the stabbing board it caught the stabbing board extension bending the work platform down.  There 
were  no  injuries  and  following  a  visual  inspection  of  the  stabbing  board,  work  resumed.    Note  that  this  is 
similar to an incident that occurred previously. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A  Safety  Bulletin  issued  previously  recommended  engineering  out  the  risk  of  the  top  drive  contacting  the 
stabbing board is the preferred method for controlling the hazard.   

 

Top drives have been added to many of the company’s rigs, yet the pipe stabber must still reach out to the 
center of the rotary to properly align the casing for makeup.  The stabbing boards then, if they haven’t been 
modified, must be retracted to prevent impact each time the top drive passes by.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Issued some engineering options to manage this risk might be: 
 
•  Shorten the working platform as much as possible (involves measuring the distance)  
•  Modify the board in such a manner that it automatically retracts or folds up. i.e., install a counterbalance 

that results in the board extension flipping up when the stabber steps to the back of the board.   

•  Hinge the extension if it telescopes to allow for easier retraction.  
 

These  are  just  a  few  ideas  that  might  work  to  minimize  the  potential  for  top  drive/stabbing  board  contact.   
Please review your stabbing boards and, how are they operated to ensure the top drive does not hit the end 
of the board?  What changes would you suggest to your equipment to “engineer out” the potential for striking 
the board with the top drive?  

 
 
 
IADC Note: Please review safety alerts 00-32, 02-45, 04-40, 04-50,    
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2006 

