Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 13 – 06  
 

POOR COMMUNICATION AMONGST CREW RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew had just finished cutting the drill line and was preparing to lower the loose piece of drill line to the 
ground.  The loose piece of drill line was tied off on one end to keep it from free falling to the ground, while 
the other end was lying on the rig floor on the off drillers’ side.  The crew members on the rig floor were told 
to stay clear of the area in preparation for the drill line to be lowered to the ground.  The Rig Manager was 
preparing the  hoist  line and a strap,  which  was to  be used for this procedure,  when another crew member 
mistakenly cut the rope that, was holding the drill line, thereby allowing the drill line to free fall to the ground.  
An employee, who was standing under the substructure, was struck with the piece of drill line as it fell to the 
ground.  The injured employee suffered a cut/scrape from this incident that required first aid treatment only. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The  JSA  that  was  performed  prior  to  this  task  did  not  describe  in  full  detail  how  this  task  should  be 

completed. 

•  The tie-off rope was cut prematurely and before the hoist and strap could be used to lower the drill line to 

• 

the ground.  
Inadequate  information  and  poor  communication.    The  injured  employee  did  not  hear  nor  receive  a 
warning to clear the area prior to the drill line being lowered to the ground. 

•  The  crew  member,  who  cut  the  snub  line,  was  taught  this  procedure  from  his  previous  employer.    He 
was a  new employee  with  this being  his first time to  cut and slip  drilling line on this rig (practicing  bad 
habits). 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company reminded all employees that a complete JSA should be created, reviewed, and or updated 

for this particular task.  The JSA should be communicated with all employees prior to starting a task. 

•  All crews were instructed to lower the drill line to the ground by the use of the hoist and a strap. 
•  All crews involved in any task were reminded to practice and demonstrate proper communication. 
•  The company reminded all Rig Managers that employees that are new to the company are at a higher 
risk  for  injury  to  themselves  and  could  cause  injury  to  others.      These  employees  must  be  properly 
supervised  until  the  supervisor  is  confident  that  there  is  adequate  knowledge  of  proper  policies  and 
procedures. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2013 

