Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 46 
 

PROPER JOB PLANNING AND REVIEW 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The company had several incidents recently where the  root cause was determined to be a failure in the job 
planning process or failure to recognize that the job steps had changed and no action was taken to revise the 
J.S.A.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
J.S.A covered changing out the BOP rams:  The employees had loosened the bonnet bolts while the stack 
was  sitting  on  the  stump.    The  stack  was  removed  from  the  stump  and  moved  by  the  trolley  over  to  the 
wellhead  and  stabbed.    The  third  party  employees  had  started  to  tighten  the  BOP  bolts  as  the  company’s 
employees continued to work on the bonnets.  A 1-½ ton come-along was used to pull the stack over so that 
the bonnets could be opened without hitting the BOP stack.  
 
1.  The step of using the 1-½ ton come-along was not mentioned in the J.S.A. and risks not analyzed.   
2.  The come-along slipped and an employee was pinned in between the BOPs and the rig tank. 
 
J.S.A.  covered  changing  out  pump  swab  rod  assembly:    The  employees  had  covered  the  steps  in  the 
J.S.A. and had begun the job.  None of the persons involved in the job realized that a step in the J.S.A. was a 
complete violation of company’s Policy on lock out and tag out. 
 
•  One of the steps in the J.S.A. required the employees to remove the pump from its locked out status and 

to activate it from a remote location and use the power of the traction motor to push the swab out. 

•  When  the  pump  was  activated  a  piece  of  the  Pony  rod  chipped  off  of  the  hub  and  struck  an  employee 

above the right eye requiring 11 stitches. 

It is ultimately the responsibility of the employees and the supervisor to critique the steps of any job before 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
• 
it is undertaken.  
• 
•  Every employee must take the initiative to protect himself and others when he recognizes a hazard. 
 

It is everyone’s responsibility to IDENTIFY HAZARDS and shut down a job when the job scope changes.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2003 

