Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 41 
 

IMPROPER STORAGE OF PIPE ON RACKS RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Twenty five joints of 5” drill pipe were being picked up from the pipe rack in the yard and being sent to a rig.  
The drill pipe along with HW pipe were stored on the pipe racks in a heap.  Eight joints of pipe were removed 
and the second set was in the process of being picked up from the rack.  The forklift being used had 4 joints of 
pipe lying on the forks with a fifth joint that was only on one fork.  The roustabout assisting in the task pushed 
the fifth joint toward the pipe rack to get it off the fork.  After accomplishing this he positioned himself on top of 
the  pipe  on  the  rack,  causing  the  pipe  to  roll  forward  and  trap  his  foot  between  two  joints.    He  suffered  a 
fracture to his leg.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The mixture of pipe on the rack had not been stored correctly (in a heap).  Measures should have been taken 
to ensure joints could be safely retrieved from the pipe rack.  The roustabout was permitted stand on the pipe 
on the rack.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed all Operations Personnel: 
 
•  All pipe on pipe racks and other material/equipment should be inspected for proper storage.   
•  Pipe should be easily accessible and should be easily retrievable by personnel.   
•  Pipe should also be stacked in the appropriate manner.   
•  Supervisors shall rectify unsafe conditions prior to starting up jobs by performing a JSA with the crew to 

perform the task.    

•  A safety meeting shall be held on each rig and yard to ensure all employees are aware of the dangers of 

this particular task.   
It is also advisable to have forklift operators undertake some form of competency training* if available.   

• 
•  More communication should be undertaken between the operators & those assisting him. 
• 
 

Instructed personnel to review Rig Management System documents on: 

Operations Document - Care and Handling of Drill Pipe/Collars 
HSE Document- Job Safety Analysis 
HSE Document - Forklift Use 

 
 
*IADC Note:  Some regulatory jurisdictions require Fork Lift Truck Operator Certification.  Also, reference IADC 
Accident Prevention Reference Guide Section 9 Forklift Operations.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2002 

