Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 02  
 

LAYING DOWN PIPE RESULTS IN A FALL 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crew was using the air hoist to lay out drill pipe.  As the motorman attempted to push a joint 
of  drill  pipe  out  the  V-door,  the  joint  of  drill  pipe  was  set  down  on  the  edge  of  the  V-door  so  the 
motorman  had to give  an  extra  push  on  the  pipe  to  help  it  out  the  V-door.   When the  joint  moved 
unexpectedly, the motorman slipped and fell forwarded catching hold of the handrail on the left side 
of the V-door.  The motorman’s momentum carried him out the v-door, where he lost his grip on the 
handrail.  He managed to grab the edge of the V-door as he fell.  He slid down the pipe ramp a short 
way and then lost his grip again, falling approximately 16 feet to the ground.  He landed on a BOP 
trolley.  He suffered a broken arm, multiple bruises and a cut on forearm 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
During the operation the air hoist operator may have set the joint down too early or the motorman 
couldn’t push hard enough with the wet floor.  Through the investigation, the crew determined that 
the motorman should have had the air hoist operator pick the joint of pipe back up before he pushed 
on it.  Rig personnel felt that the motorman didn’t ask himself “what if” before he began pushing on 
the pipe.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  Each job we do on the rig requires everyone involved asking the question “what if”.  Each person 

must take into consideration their surroundings before they start a job.   

•  Also, use the mechanical equipment to do the moving. 
•  Having experience in the oilfield is great; however, even experienced personnel are still 

susceptible to mistakes and injuries if everyone doesn’t stay focused on safety.  

•  Use the STOP process to assist each other with unsafe acts.  There are times, however, when 

other personnel do things so quickly that it’s over before you can react.  This is why everyone 
must take time to be sure that they are aware of the hazards and are asking the right questions 
about the job ahead of time. 

•  Don’t get caught up in a situation without having thought through the outcome of what you’re 

about to do.   

 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to the IADC APRG Section 3 for additional information. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2003 

