Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

RESTRICTED WORK CASE RESULTS 
FROM CAUGHT BETWEEN INCIDENT 

 
ALERT 09 – 11 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Work Group Supervisor instructed three workers 
to  manually  transfer  the  mud  pump  air  duct  (about 
80  Kg)  from  cement  bulk  room  to  mud  pump  room 
through  the  cement  unit  room.    When  they  reached 
the  mud  pump  room  door  an  additional  employee 
(IP)  decided 
lifting 
operation.  When they attempted to land the air duct 
on  mud  pump  room  floor  the  IP's  left  hand  middle 
finger  was  caught  between  the  air  duct  and  a  pipe 
flange caused swelling in his middle finger tip end. 
 
 

to  help  with 

this  manual 

The IP’s hand position between the air duct and pipe 
flange 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The  company’s  safety  management  system  was  not  followed;  as  the  job  was  considered  routine  job 

where there is no specific preparation Safety Job Analysis or Permit To Work. 

  The job was poorly planned and executed.  The Work Group Supervisor failed to assess the hazard of 
the  job  and  failed  to  assign  adequate  personnel  to  manually  lift  the  air  duct,  to  the  extent  that  the  IP 
decided to join in when he saw that the three persons assigned to the job had difficulty continuing. 

  The work group was having difficulty with the load, but they did not stop and assess / ask for a new plan. 
  They allowed the IP to intervene without being part of the original job, plan. 
 

Instead of intervening to stop the project, the injured added to the hazard by physically putting him self in 
harms way. 

  Group  communication;  lessons  learned  from  previous  incidents  involving  manual  handling  was  not 

communicated. 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Conducted refresher “Manual Handling” training at the rig for all crews –  

o  Used learning’s from previous incident (s) in the refresher training. 
o  The training also included instructions to the personnel that the company’s Safety Management 

System, Safe Job Assessment / Work Permit / Lifting Plan are to be adhered to. 

  Work Group Supervisor was instructed to carry out his responsibilities towards his work group safety. 
  Personnel were instructed to practice beyond Safety – Stop when in doubt. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2009 

