Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 23 
 

PERSONNEL HOISTING OPERATIONS RESULTS 

IN A RESTRICTED WORK CASE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
There was a leak in a union on the mud pump high pressure mud line leading to the rig floor stand pipe.  The 
injured person was lowered below the rig floor using the rig floor air winch.  He was to loosen the clamps on 
the  high  pressure  mud  line  to  be  able  to  change  the  union  O  ring.    The  air  winch  operator  did  not  remain 
standing by at the air winch.  When the Driller came back from break time he picked-up the air winch line and 
he was not aware that there was a man hanging in the winch line below rig floor level.  The injured person’s 
right shoulder was hit against the sub base beams before the Assistant Driller was able to stop the Driller.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  No permit to work issued and no pre-job safety meeting was held. 
2.  The incident reflects poor planning. 
3.  There was no assigned operator on the air winch. 
4.  There was no independent observer for the job, and there was no assigned work supervisor, therefore 

there was a lack of supervision. 

5.  Lack of safety awareness by the driller. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Issued the following directive to all rig personnel:   
 
1.  Pre-job safety meeting to be conducted with all crewmembers involved in the task. 
2.  Permit To Work is to be issued, including all precautions and the permit to be displayed in worksite. 
3.  There must be an operator on the air winch all the time. 
4.  There must be an independent observer all the time for similar jobs and or work supervisor. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2002 

