Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 09 
 

ELECTRICAL ARC FLASH INJURY INVOLVING EXTENSION CORD 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  employee  (Welder/Fabricator)  was  attempting  to  plug  in  an  extension  cord  from  a  240  volt,  3  phase 
disconnect to a welding unit.  As the employee plugged the two cords together, a short occurred and an arc 
flash occurred resulting in second degree burns to the employee’s abdomen.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Twist-lock 240-Volt plug & socket after incident. 

 

 

PPE  worn  incorrectly  and  resulting  burn  in 
undershirt 

 
1)  The extension cord and welding unit had twist-lock plugs and socket ends.   
2)  The plug and wire were both large and the employee held the plug and socket end at his waist to 

3)  When the connection was made, two of the conductors inside the connector shorted out causing an 

4)  The employee was not wearing his personal protective equipment properly – The external button-up 

shirt (FRC material) was completely unbuttoned and shirt-tail out. 

make the connection.   

arc flash. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Instructed supervisors and HSE personnel to:   
 
1)  Evaluate each facility and related equipment to assess the requirement for hard wiring equipment where 

temporary wiring is unacceptable to meet manufacturer’s specifications. 

2)  Establish a list of qualified and authorized users for each piece of equipment. 
3)  Replace  all  Twist-To-Lock  plug  and  socket  connectors  with  properly  sized  and  non-conductive 

4) 

connectors. Replacement shall be performed by a qualified and authorized electrician. 
Inspect all equipment that requires plug and socket connectors greater than 120 VAC to ensure that all 
connectors are adequately sized and in good condition, and that the cord is of adequate length and size 
to meet all manufacturer’s specifications (Extension cords should not be used). 

5)  Provide instruction to all authorized users of equipment that all electrical connections must be made with 

the power “OFF” or power source otherwise locked out. 

6)  Once  all  electrical  connections  have  been  made  the  equipment  may  be  energized  by  placing  the 
electrical disconnect or breaker in the “ON” position. Stand to the side when moving the breaker or the 
equipment power switch to the “ON” position. 
Inspect all equipment cords, plugs, sockets and electrical components at least monthly and daily before 
each use. 

7) 

8)  All personal protective equipment must be worn correctly at all times while in the work area. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2009 

