Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 35 
 

CRANE FAILURE RESULTS IN DROPPED LOAD 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During rig up operations a crane upper assembly failed.  While lifting the draw-works platform (25-ton) by 
means of 2 cranes, to install the bracket support, one of the cranes gave away and the load was dropped.  
Upon  investigation  of  the  failed  crane,  it  appeared  that  the  bolts  holding  the  upper  structure  (operator’s 
cabin  and  the  telescopic  section)  sheared  which  caused  the  boom  to  drop  with  the  load  hitting  the 
drawworks brake cover.  
 

Upper crane structure (operator cabin, crane 

 

boom telescopic sections) fell across the 

drawworks platform and struck the drawworks 

brake cover. 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Bolts holding the upper structure failed.  
•  There had been no site supervisor at the rig up location, therefore the crane was not inspected and the 

crew basically felt comfortable to operate as it had been previously assigned to another company rig. 

•  The crane certificate was issued by an unknown office with no accreditation. 
•  The crane operator was found not to be competent for the crane operated.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Only cranes with certificates issued by a recognized certification body are to be accepted at company 

•  A list of recognized certification bodies is to be communicated to contractors through the company’s 

work locations. 

Transportation Superintendent. 

•  Adequate supervision to be performed for the jobs during the rig up operation.  Each group should have 

an experienced and competent supervisor, and the designated site supervisor should control all 
operations. 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2008 

