Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 43 
 

RIG FIRE OCCURS WHILE RIG IS IN  

SHIPYARD FOR MODIFICATIONS 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Rig Status:  A rig was in the shipyard for upgrades, and one project involved extending a 1.5 inch diesel fuel 
line  to  the  top  of  the  living  quarters  to  supply  fuel  to  the  emergency  generator.    The  new  fuel  line  was 
connected to the fuel line that supplied the crane.   
 
Fire Event:  A crewman on a nearby rig noticed a small fire start on top boards of a small scaffold erected on 
the port-forward side of the living quarters.  It quickly migrated outboard toward the port side and accelerated 
at  a  high  rate.    The  fire  dropped  to  the  deck  below  and  immediately  engulfed  that  area  and  continued  to 
accelerate on the walls of the living quarters.  The fire spread to the shell of the emergency generator and to 
the hose-storage platform.  The fire went from a small size to engulfing the side of the living quarters in less 
than  two  minutes.   When  it  became  apparent  that  the  fire  was  raging  on  the  port  side,  the  fuel  pump  was 
shut off.  It is estimated that 50 gallons of diesel spilled.  Fortunately a 15 to 20 mph wind was blowing from 
starboard to port across the rig.  The first attack on the fire was within four minutes but the shipyard fire main 
was too small and  did  not  have sufficient pressure.   Effective fire fighting did not take place until about six 
minutes after the fire began.  At this time several explosions from the jack house occurred.  The fire was out 
in fifteen minutes.  The local fire department arrived on scene after sixteen minutes.   
 
Damage  Assessment  (No  injuries.)    Major  damage  to  the  outer  shell  of  por-tside  quarters—structure, 
insulation,  and  wiring  was  destroyed.    Damage  to  the  jacking  system:  Cover  plates  warped.  New  bearings 
and seals were required.  There was damage to the emergency generator room and equipment. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Causal Factors:   
1.    The  welder  who  installed  the  valve  to  the  fuel  line  tack,  welded  it  in  place,  but  did  not  complete  the 
welding of the valve to the fuel line since he intended to readjust it and weld it completely in place the next 
day.   
2.  As it was quitting time, the welding crew picked up their tools and left the rig.   
3.  They did not notify anyone of the work status.   
4.  Their welding machine was left running with welding leads attached.   
5.  Following their departure, a check was made to ensure the line was installed and the valve on the end 
was closed.  It was not recognized that the valve fitting was only tack welded.   
6.  Later, the crane needed to be refueled so a call was made to have the diesel pump turned on.   
7.  There  were  no  isolation  valves  in  the  fuel  line,  therefore  all  the  lines  were  charged  resulting  in  diesel 
under  pressure  sprayed  from  the  tack-welded  fitting  onto  the  top  deck  and  down  the  sides  of  the 
quarters onto the main deck.   
8.  Since ignition started on the scaffolding about halfway up the wall of the quarters, it is suspected that a 
smoldering rod or energized welding lead triggered the fire.   
 
Other Factors:   
 
•  No JSA was written by the shipyard or the rig crew for hot work or refueling. 
•  No lock-out or tag-out procedure applied to the fuel service line. 
•  No verification of shipyard fire main capacity. 
•  There was no hot work permit approved by the OIM for the job being performed by the shipyard crew. 
•  Welding machines were left running with the live leads in the area of the fire.  The welding leads were 

not properly insulated with wiring exposed and were left connected to an unattended welding machine. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  Unsecured fittings on the fuel line were created by the shipyard workers.  
•  Failure to communicate the status of the work at the end of the day.  No formal handover procedure was 

used. (same scenario as in Piper Alpha disaster) 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The crew involved with the task along with their supervisor is to write a JSA prior to each job. 
•  The OIM is to ensure that all work permits are approved by prior to any work with the rig crew being 

informed prior to any work on any fuel lines. 

•  Welding machines are not to be left running while unattended and welding leads are to be in good 

condition. 

•  Work site is to be checked prior to leaving the job site to ensure housekeeping and communications of 

the job status with unfinished work tagged. 

•  When work is being done on fuel lines, the fuel pumps are to be locked and tagged out. 
•  Company personnel are to work to improve communications between the rig personnel and shipyard 

•  As part of this effort rig management is to hold morning meetings so that both rig and shipyard personnel 

construction personnel. 

know what each other will be doing. 

•  Rig supervisors are to ensure proper controls are in use when fuel is bunkered or being transferred. 

Involve RSTR to verify proper controls are in place. 

•  Rig management is to hold fire drills even when the rig is in the shipyard. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2008 

