Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DERRICK DIVING BOARD FELL TO RIG FLOOR 

 
ALERT 05 – 12 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

A  150  ton  dual  tubing  spider  and  manual  hand  slips  were  being  used  for  making  up  and  standing  back 
stands of 2-7/8” tubing, in the derrick.  After running 18 joints of tubing and 6 blast joints into the hole, the 
driller  started  pulling  and  racking  back  whole  stands  of  pipe.    After  the  driller  pulled  and  racked  back  the 
second stand, he started to lower the dual spider when it struck the derrick diving board.  The blow to the 
board caused it to shear off from the racking board and fall 85’ (28 meters) on to the strong back walkway 
located  outside  the  rig  floor  area.    Fortunately  there  were  no  injuries  to  personnel  and  limited  equipment 
damage  

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

•  Safety slings that had once been installed on the derrick diving board to preclude the board from 

falling from the derrick had been removed at some time prior to the incident. 

•  Due to their size, the 150 ton dual tubing spiders being used were not designed to safely make up 

stands of tubing and rack them back in the derrick.  This type spider will not pass the end of the diving 
board unless it is guided and oriented by the derrickman.  

•  The driller had not removed the Plexiglas rain shield located above him to gain a clear view up the 

derrick.  The driller was instead relying on signals relayed from the derrickman to the man on the 
stabbing board and then to the driller. 

•  The available JSA had not been updated to cover all of the hazards of the job, and when reviewed,  

no step by step procedure was established for the discussion of JSA’s 

•  The JSA did not cover the added risk of racking pipe with the 150 ton spider. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives: 

•  Fixed safety slings connected to proper anchor points will be re-installed on the diving board when it is 

•  Safety slings for the diving board will be added as a line item on the Mast Inspection Report for future 

repaired and mounted into the mast 

inspections. 

•  The use of 150 ton dual tubing spider with large elevators will be discontinued and replaced with side door 

or center latch tubing elevators for this job. 

•  JSA’s shall be written and reviewed by the personnel involved in the task and a concerted effort will be 

made to address all hazards, especially when conditions change.  

•  The driller must remove the Plexiglas window above him when tripping in/out of the hole to prevent his 

vision of the mast from being obscured and to allow direct communications. 

View of missing diving board 

View of broken diving board padeyes 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2005 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

