Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 20  
 

INCORRECT LENGTH OF TONG SNUB LINE RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A rig floor operation required a longer snub line so the drill crew changed out the snub line on the make-up 
tong  for  longer  tong  snub  line.    The  floormen  retrieved  the  old  break-out  tong  snub  line  that  was  being 
utilized as a rig floor sling and installed it on the make-up tong.  When the operation was completed, the drill 
crew did not replace the longer snub line with the standard length one.  Two days later when the drill crew 
was  making up  a  bit  onto  a  bit  sub  the  driller  engaged  the rotary  into  reverse  to  back  the  bit  into  the sub.  
This caused the make-up tong to rotate around 180 degrees from the anchor post, instead of stopping at 90 
degrees.  This resulted in the floorman manning the make up tong to become trapped between the tong and 
the extended snub line suffering fatal injuries. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  The drill crew did not replace the longer tong line with the proper tong line on completion of the task 

that required longer snub line. 

  When the drill crew engaged the tongs they did not push the tongs around to a point that the snub 

line would be taut thus allowing them and the driller to see that the line was too long. 

  The driller going off tour did not inform the driller coming on tour that the snub line on the make-up 

tongs was changed out for a longer one to accommodate a special operation. 

  The  supervisor  felt  that  a  JSA  for  tripping  pipe  adequately  covered  the  steps  of  the  task  at  hand 

when it actually did not (making up a bit). 

  The practice of removing snub lines and placing them into service as a sling if they passed a visual 

inspection had developed despite a company alert stating that they are to be destroyed. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

  Rig Managers are to review this alert and the following procedures with all crews.  Reference is to be 
made  to  the  company’s  operations  manual  sections  “Making  a  Connection”,  “Driller  Tour  Changes 
and Daily Checks”, “Tong Care and Rigging”  

  Rig personnel are to review and make changes to the relevant JSAs aboard their facility to reflect the 
requirement  of  a  Permit  To  Work  for  changing  of  snub  lines  as  detailed  in  company’s  Operations 
Procedure manual.   

  Drillers are to incorporate the new drill floor check list as minimum standard into their daily checks of 

the rig floor. 

  Rig Managers are to change the relevant JSAs to ensure the capture of the changes to procedures 

regarding changes being made to rig floor equipment.    

  Rig Managers are to incorporate the minimum requirements of the procedures for “Making Up a Bit” 

when they are released to the fleet. 

 
 
IADC Note: Refer to IADC APRG Section 3 for additional information. 
Refer  to:  IADC  Safety  ALERT  03  –  28  TONG  INCIDENT  RESULTS  IN  A  FATALITY  and  04  –  11 
MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE TONG SNUB-LINE REMOVAL RESULTS IN AN INJURY for information 
on similar incidents.  
Additional Note:  Refer to  API 7K  
Rev. Nov 09 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2009 

