Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 02 – 43 
 

DRILL COLLAR BACKS OUT OF LIFT SUB 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While preparing to lay down the bottom hole collar, the crew was attempting to breakout the bit.  The lift sub 
backed  out  of  the  drill  collar  allowing  the  drill  collar  to  fall.    The  drill  collar  fell  off  the  rig  floor  striking  the 
windwall  on  the  drillers  side  of  the  “V-Door”.    The  drill  collar  came  to  rest  with  the  box  end  sticking  in  the 
ground and the bit at rest against the substructure near the “V-Door”.  There were no injuries.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The investigation reveled that there were no procedure in place for handling the laying down and/or breaking 
out of the bit from the bottom collar prior to laying it down.  Due to this, personnel were not aware of the need 
to  make  the  lift-handling  sub  secure  in  the  drill  collar  prior  to  hoisting  it  to  break  out  the  bit.    Without 
procedures, there was not adequate training and therefore inadequate knowledge by the personnel working on 
the rig floor.   Haste to get  the  drill collars laid down and  lack of supervision allowed  the collar  to  be hoisted 
without the lift sub being tightened into the drill collar.  Due to inadequate visual contact, no one observed that 
the  drill  collar  was  turning  out  of  the  lift  sub.    It  was  also  discovered  that  there  was  poor  communication 
between the supervisor and rig floor crewmen.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Issued the following directive to rig crews:   
 
•  Make a new JSA to address breaking the bit out while laying down drill collars.   

It was recommended that when developing the JSA, crews include leaving 2 or 3 drill collars above the 
bit when breaking out the bit.    

•  Also to be  included  in the  JSA is a procedure to ensure that the  lift sub is tightened (torqued) in the 

upper drill collar connection prior to hoisting the drill collars to break out the bit.   
Include in the JSA a provision to have one of rig floor crewman observe the lift sub to ensure that  it 
does not back out when the bit is being broke out and removed from the drill collar.   

• 

• 

 
 

 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  Reference IADC Accident Prevention Reference Guide Section 3.26 for information on drill collar 
lift subs.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2002 

