Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

LAYING OUT DRILL PIPE RESULTS IN BROKEN FINGER (LTI) 

 
ALERT 09 – 27  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  crew  was  lowering  5''  drill  pipe  from  the  rig 
floor down to the catwalk using the air winch through 
the V-door.  A floor man (IP) was assigned to work 
near  the  catwalk  to  take  off  the  lifting  cap  from  the 
drill  pipe.    He  was  instructed  to  put  another  nipple 
under  the  drill  pipe  while  it  was  lowered  onto  the 
catwalk and before it was laid down on the catwalk.  
This  was  to  make  it  easier  to  slide  the  drill  pipe.  
After the drill pipe had been laid on the catwalk, the 
IP  started  to  take  off  the  lifting  cap,  which  was  still 
connected  to  the  air  hoist  line.    The  drill  pipe  tilted 
toward the IP’s right hand and fractured his thumb. 
 

Position of the Injured person while taking off 

lifting cap 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  No SJA (JSA) was issued for laying down drill pipe using rig floor air hoist. 
2. 
3.  Lack of safety awareness by the IP as he was taking off the lifting cap while: 

Improper working position and failure to identify job hazards. 

  Using one hand. 
  The air hoist wire was still under tension and attached to the lifting cap causing resistance to IP's 

hand. 

4.  Failure to follow procedure:  IP put the nipple under the drill pipe in the middle instead of nearer the box 

end.  Therefore it tilted toward his right hand side. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1. 

Instructed rig personnel to initiate SJA (JSA) to cover laying down drill pipe from rig floor.  The SJA (JSA) 
is to clarify "Working on Catwalk" hazards. 

2.  This SJA is to be communicated to all drilling crews. 
3. 

Instructed rig supervisors to improve safety awareness of the crews through pre job safety meetings and 
coaching. 

 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2009 

