Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

STANDING ON CASING RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 
ALERT 06 – 10  
 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
IP was rolling casing from pipe 
rack  towards  cat  walk.    There 
were  2  rows  of  casing  and  he 
was rolling one from half empty 
top  row  while  standing  on 
bottom  row.    The  fork  lift  was 
trying to move one casing joint 
from  the  top  row  to  catwalk.  
The  IP  saw  that  the  joint  was 
slowly 
towards  him.  
Thinking  that  he  might  get  hit, 
he  jumped  from  a  height  of 
1.06m (3.44 ft).  While trying to 
break  the  jump,  he  landed  on 
his  right  palm  and  strained  his 
wrist  and  palm.  X-ray  was 
taken  revealing  wrist  fracture 
of metatarsal bone.  
 
Recreation of the incident: 

rolling 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Man was rolling casing while standing on top of a layer of casing on the pipe rack.   
2. 

Inadequate staff at the time of the task. Lone roustabout rolled pipes as he relieved fellow roustabout to 
have tea. 

3.  The hazards of working casing on the pipe rack were conveyed to the staff during the Tool Box Talk at 

4.  The Forklift operator was relatively new, more skilful lifting of the pipe could avoid the adjacent pipe from 

5.  Lack  of  Hazard  Awareness:    Pipe  rolling  and  falling  from  height  hazards  were  not  appreciated  and 

the start of the shift.   

being rolled down. (indirect cause) 

understood by the IP. 

 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: to address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  The Toolpushers and HSEA personnel carried out lateral learning on trip and fall hazard for all company 

2.  There were separate meetings held with crew and Rig management, to nominate Safety Champions to 

enhance site safety as per Hearts and Minds initiative. This process is ongoing.  

3.  The company  instituted  efforts  to  improve  Field Operations  and safety  standards by  utilizing  dedicated 
field trainers.  This process is on going.  Two dedicated trainers are identified and are to join the Team 
this week. 

rigs.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2006 

