Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 01  
 

FALL FROM V-DOOR RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The crew was in the process of preparing to lay down the directional tool.  One crew member was running 
the  hoist  while  the  other  was  unchaining  the  snatch  block  from  the  handrail  next  to  the  V-door  post.    The 
crew member running the hoist was pulling slack from the lay-down line when it snagged on the substructure 
pulling  the  line  tight  and  against  the  crew  member  standing  next  to  the  V-door  post  and  the  open  V-door 
gate.  The now  tightened  lay-down line pushed the crew member out of the open V-door and down the V-
door slide where he hit the pipe stop and rolled onto the catwalk.  The injured person sustained some minor 
swelling and discomfort to his back. 
 

procedure. 

the same time. 

 

rigs in the fleet. 

Position of the Injured Employee prior to his fall and 

Position of the employee after his fall. 

the position of the snatch block chain. 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  The  V-door  gate  was  opened  pre-maturely  which  allowed  the  injured  person  to  work  from  a  height 

without the use of a guard rail in place. 

•  The injured person and the crew member running the hoist were not communicating properly during this 

•  The snatch block was hung from a handrail too close to the open V-door area. 
•  The crew became complacent and did not recognize the potential hazard in performing multiple tasks at 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  Reviewed  and/or  updated  all  JSAs  for  this  particular  task  and  the  information  was  shared  amongst  all 

•  Reminded  crew  members  that  the  V-door  gate  should  never  be  open  until  you  are  ready  to  either  lay 
something  down  or  lift  something  to  the  rig  floor.    The  crew  members  were  also  reminded  to  take  one 
step at a time. 

•  Reminded all crew members to remain in constant communication during such a task. 
• 

Informed all rigs that the snatch block should be hung below the V-door gate.  This would allow the V-
door gate to remain closed until they are ready to open it. 

•  The crew was reminded about the need to recognize the potential of all hazards while performing their 

job tasks. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2013 

