Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 04  
 

MICROWAVE OVEN HAZARD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While boiling liquids in a microwave oven is commonplace we should all be aware of a potentially dangerous 
situation  that  exists  with  this  practice.  The  following  information  is  important  and  you  are  encouraged  to 
share that information with your family and friends.  
 
When water or other liquids are placed in a microwave oven with the intent of boiling them, it is possible for 
the  liquid  to  retain  the  energy  introduced  while  not  actually  boiling.  When  the  liquid  is  removed  from  the 
microwave  and  jarred,  the  stored  energy  can  suddenly  be  released  from  the  container.  People  have  been 
injured by very hot liquid being propelled into their face and eyes.  Microwave manufactures have confirmed 
that these type of events can and do occur. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A phenomenon known as super heating can occur anytime water / liquid is heated and will particularly occur 
if the container is new or when heating small amounts (less that half a cup).  Water and other liquids do not 
always bubble when they reach their boiling point.  Super heating occurs when the liquid heats faster that the 
vapor  bubbles  can  form.    If  the  container  is  new,  it  is  unlikely  to  have  small  surface  scratches  inside  that 
provide a place for the bubbles to form.  If the bubbles do not form, the heat / energy is not released and the 
liquid heats up in excess of its boiling point.  When taking the container from the microwave oven it is not 
always apparent that the liquid is boiling and the slightest bump or jarring action can be enough to shock the 
liquid.  This shock will cause bubbles to rapidly form and expel the hot liquid from the container.  This effect 
is similar to what happens when a carbonated beverage is shaken and the rapid formation of bubbles causes 
the beverage to release when opened. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this issue, this company issued the following to their 
employees: 
 
•  Water or liquids should not be heated in a microwave oven, use alternative methods.   
•  Placing a non-metal object in the liquid to defuse the energy when heating such as a tea bag / wooden 

stir stick.   

•  Never heat small amounts, less that half a cup.  
•  Avoid new containers lacking small surface scratches or imperfections  
 
We are now aware of this Risk / Hazard. Our behavior will determine what we choose to do. Actions 
taken to eliminate or mitigate this risk should be our choice. 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to Alert 00 – 08 and 03 – 24 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2006 

