Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 40 
 

WELDING OPERATIONS RESULTS IN AN EYE INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  rig  welder  began  to  feel  discomfort  in  his  eye.    Believing  it  may  be  a  flash  burn  he  stopped 
working,  checked  all  PPE  and  then  continued  with  his  normal  duties.    The  next  morning  the 
discomfort continued so he decided he should see a Physicians Assistant.  A small piece of metal 
was found and a rust ring had formed.  He was treated and returned to work. 
 

•  SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS  

Patients who experience a foreign body of the cornea generally have mild, moderate, or 
occasionally severe pain.  

•  Sometimes, the discomfort is described as a scratchiness or the aptly named “foreign-body 

sensation.”  Excessive tearing, blurred vision and sensitivity to light are also common 
complaints.  

•  The most critical sign is the finding of particulate matter at the surface of or embedded 

within the cornea. If the foreign body is metallic, you’ll often see a rust ring surrounding the 
object.  If the foreign object remained embedded in the cornea for 24 hours or more, you 
may see a ring infiltrate surrounding the site. 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
 
 

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  

  
  

  

  

  
  

  

  
  

  

  
  

 

  

EExxaammppllee  ooff  aa  
RRuusstt  RRiinngg  

  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company recommended the following: 
 

•  Qualified medical personnel must examine all eye injuries, no matter how small 

•  Early treatment of eye injuries can prevent them from becoming much more serious, 

including “Rust Ring” 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2005 

