Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 42 
 

MATERIAL HANDLING INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An employee had his left middle finger caught between a connecting rod and the body of a power pack for a diesel engine.  
The power pack was lying on the engine grating walkway and was being moved from the grating walkway platform to the 
main deck.  The 400-pound power pack was pushed along the floor by two men using their feet to move the power pack 
approximately  15  feet  towards  a  hatch  opening  to  the  main  deck.  At  the  opening  for  the  watertight  door  both  men 
attempted to physically pick up the power pack and lift it approximately 7 inches over the hatchway opening.  One of the 
employees decided to lift the power pack by placing both hands inside the body of the cylinder head.  On previous lifts he 
had placed his hand on the connecting rod of the power pack.  He changed his hand position because the connecting rod 
was turning in a circular fashion making it difficult to control the load.  As the men were going through the door, the piston 
body cleared the 7-inch rise but when the men lowered the piston body the rod caught on the hatch opening catching the 
employee’s left middle finger between the rod and the body of the power pack. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Not recognizing the hazards associated with job.  The JSA did mention to beware of pinch points, but didn’t identify that 
putting your hands inside the power pack would be a pinch point.  Improper Handling of Materials - need some form of 
mechanical means when moving an awkward 400-lb. load. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed Rig and Maintenance Personnel to change the JSA to: 
 
• 
•  Change the JSA to identify which mechanical means you are using to move the power packs. 
•  Use a transport box and dolly to move power packs 
 

Identify all pinch points:   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2002 

 

