Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 32 
 

DROPPED SLIP DIES RESULTS IN BROKEN HAND 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While running a dual string of 5” and 2-3/8” tubing using air slips, the slips did not set properly when slacking 
off of the tubing.  This caused two of the setscrews that hold the slip dies in place, to shear off.  After the 
tubing was picked up the slips opened and the die came out of the slips and fell through the rotary into the 
moon pool, striking an employee on the hand. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Due  to  rig  motion  the  slips  were  not  setting  properly  and  were  difficult  to  align  while  running  the  dual 

2.  There was poor communication between the rig floor and moon pool area.  
3.  JSAs did not identify that all personnel must be clear of the moon pool before tubulars are moved in the 

string of tubing. 

rotary. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 
 

Issued the following directives: 

1.  Check all equipment completely before use. 
2.  Do  not  move  tubulars  until  all  personnel  are  clear  (including  personnel  below  the  rotary)  and 

clearance is given to the Driller. 

3.  Employees must pay close attention to be sure that slips have set properly every time. 

1.  Update the JSAs to include requirements that all personnel are clear from the moon pool area prior 

to handling tubulars in the rotary. 
Instructed rig supervisors to make sure that any Master JSA relating to this Safety Alert is updated. 
Instructed rig supervisors to review the updated JSA with all rig personnel.   

2. 
3. 

 

 
 

 
  Action Items 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2009 

