Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 45  
 

STABBING BOARD INCIDENT RESULTS IN AN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  incident  occurred  when  the  stabbing  board  fell,  resulting  in  a  fractured  ankle.  The  Assistant  Driller  (AD) 
sent  a  Floorhand  up  to  the  stabbing  board  to  check  the  prep  work  on  the  welds  for  the  Non  Destructive 
Inspection.    The  Floorhand  entered  the  stabbing  board  which  was  not  in  its  properly  stored  location  and 
attempted to lower the stabbing board, but was unsuccessful.  The AD went up to the stabbing board to assist 
the Floorhand in lowering the stabbing board.  The AD manually disengaged the safety lock and the Floorhand 
opened  the  “dogs”  so  the  stabbing  board  could  be  lowered.  The  AD  then  proceeded  to  lower  the  stabbing 
board.   While  lowering  the  stabbing  board,  the  lifting  cable  parted  and  dropping  the  stabbing  board  8’  –  10’ 
feet.  The Floorhand was properly secured with a full body harness attached to a safety retracting lifeline, that 
was  located  at  the  top  of  the  stabbing  board  frame  work  and  anchored  to  the  Derrick  structure.    The 
Floorhand’s fall was arrested by the safety retracting lifeline, but he was struck by the framework as the board 
descended, which resulted in a first aid case.  The AD was wearing a full body harness, but had attached the 
safety lanyard to the stabbing board.  The AD fell with the stabbing board and received a fractured ankle. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
No pre-job meeting was conducted between the AD and Floorhand and the weight of the stabbing board and 
two employees  was not evaluated..  The weight  of two employees on the stabbing board combined  with  the 
weight of the board exceeded the safe working load (1,500 lbs) of the stabbing board assembly.  The AD was 
not  utilizing  proper  fall  protection  per  company  policy  and  secondary  fall  protection  had  been  removed.  
Although it is not necessary to disengage the primary safety device to lower the stabbing board, it had been 
manually disengaged and thus prevented the primary safety device from working properly.   
 
It was also found that neither the Chief Engineer nor Mechanic was notified of the mechanical problems with 
the stabbing board.   Although  in use  only five months, the cable showed unusual  wear  at the  point  where it 
parted.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed operations personnel to:   
 
•  Ensure personnel understand the importance of not securing themselves to the stabbing board, or to any 

equipment that has the potential to fall.  Additionally, equipment and procedures must be in place to 
prevent potential falling equipment from striking anyone. 

•  Create a separate JSA for stabbing board inspection/work.  Include the use of safety retracting lifelines 

instead of lanyard.  

•  The stabbing board JSA must be reviewed prior to use.   
• 
• 

Identify the Safe Working Load for the stabbing board and include it in the Master JSA.   
Install a sign at the stabbing board entrance that states, “Safety Retracting Lifeline” required while working 
on stabbing board. 

•  Stabbing boards with Cable Climber type devices must renew cables annually.  
•  Stabbing boards must be stored with weight off the winch or hoist. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2002 

