Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 26 
 

CRANE LIFTING OPERATION RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The incident occurred on the starboard aft pipe deck and involved the removal of a non-magnetic drill collar 
from  its  transport  basket  and  laying  it  out  in  the  adjacent  open  bay.    The  injured  party  (IP)  and  another 
roustabout  carried  out  the  slinging  of  the  collar  in  preparation  for  lifting.    The  injured  party,  who  was  the 
designated banksman (signalman), signaled the crane operator to lift the collar out of the basket.  As the lift 
progressed,  the  other  roustabout  involved  in  the  lifting  operation  realized  that  the  boom  was  not  properly 
positioned  over  the  load  and  called  for  a  stop.    By  this  time  the  collar  was  clear  of  the  basket  and  swung 
towards the injured party who was clear of it as it passed.  The collar struck the protective beams, and on its 
return swing, the collar impacted the IP in the lower left abdomen area.  The IP was transported onshore and 
received medical attention, but expired two days later. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Task Based Risk Assessment (JSA equivalent) was not used prior to starting the task 
  Decision Point hazard recognition process was available, but not used. 
  Lifting procedure was not followed – crane boom tip was not centered over the load. 
  Failure to use available escape route. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Conducted a Safety Stand-down to discuss incident and lessons learned and instructed personnel that 

the Task Based Risk Assessment (TBRA) process is to be used consistently.  (JSA equivalent). 

  Reinforced with personnel to always use an escape route and protect themselves first. 
  Task-Based Risk Assessment (TBRA) for general lifting was upgraded (JSA equivalent). 
  Reinforced 4-point check process for crane lifting operations. (StepBack 5x5 equivalent). 
  Translated all TBRAs to the native language(s) of workers. 
  Required a TBRA to be completed each tour (12 hours) for crane lifting operations. 
 

Instructed supervisors to conduct verification of task-based risk assessments via the observation safety 
program. 

  Added a 2nd translator to each rig so that there would be 24 hour translator coverage. 
 

Instructed crane operators to take tension on all loads, then stop lifting before load leaves the deck and 
ensure it is safe to lift. 

  The company’s procedures and training materials were reviewed by translators to ensure proper wording 

and understanding. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

 

Offshore Baskets 

Roustabout 

 

Direction of initial swing. 

9 ½ Drill Collar 

Fan 
Room 

Direction 

After 
Bounce 

IP 

Beams 

Pipe Deck Pipe Handler 
(Knuckle boom crane) 

AFT 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

Starboard 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2010 

