Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
ALERT 04 –43 
 

EMPLOYEE SLIPPED WHILE GOING DOWN STAIRS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The employee was about to travel down a flight of stairs with both hands on the handrail.  As the employee 
proceeded to make the first step, his foot slipped causing him to grab tighter on the  handrails to  break his 
fall.  When this happened his arms shifted to the  outside of the handrails and his forearm came in contact 
with a stainless steel wire hanger that was in an opened position.  He sustained a 4” to 5” laceration to his 
left outer forearm. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

1.  The  stair  treads  were  made  from  diamond  plate,  with  non-skid  step  covers  that  had  been  painted 

1.  The  stainless  steel  wire  hanger  that  had  been  placed  directly  to  the  left  of  the  handrail  was  put  in 

over and moderately dirty. 

close proximity to the handrail. 

2.  No one recognized the stainless steel wire hanger as a hazard. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following action items: 
 

1.  The  Safety  Committees  will  complete  a  Hazard  Hunt  to  specifically  look  for  brackets,  clamps  and 

other things that could cause a hazard around handrails and stairway handrails. 

1.  The Safety Committees will complete a Hazard Hunt  to specifically check the condition of the non-
skid tread on stairways and main deck landings on stairways; also outside hatches opening onto the 
main deck areas. 

 
Note: Non-skid treads and deck plates must never be painted and shall be kept clean at all times.  If the non-
skid is worn to the point that it is no longer effective then it must be replaced.  
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2004 

