Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 23 
 

IMPROPER LIFTING PRACTICE RESULTS IN 
A (RESTRICTED WORK / TRANSFER CASE) 

 

in  a 

resulted 

improper 

lifting  practice 

Ramp to be 
unloaded 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An 
restricted
work/trasfter case during a rig move, and while removing the
carrier’s  ramp  off  the  trailer  at  a  new  location.    The
workgroup  consisted  of  a  driller  (supervisor),  a  derrick  man
and a floor man (Injured Person).  The forklift was positioned
to take off the ramp from the right side of the trailer and the 
driller  was  beside  it  giving  signals.    To  facilitate  the  lift, two 
stoppers  were  removed  from  the  forklift  side.    The  forklift
operator  tried  to  lift  the  load  off  the  trailer  but  it  couldn’t  lift
the  load  higher  than  the  stoppers  installed  on  the  opposite
side of the trailer bed.  The driller asked the forklift driver to 
rest  the  load  on  the  truck  and  asked  the  IP  to  remove  the
stoppers  from  the  other  side,  which  were  in  between  the
ramp  and  the  delivery  line  (narrow  place).    The  IP  went  to
the other side of the truck where the driller couldn’t see him
and  tried  to  remove  the  stoppers.    Without  checking  on  the
status of the IP, the driller asked the forklift operator to raise
the ramp again and didn’t notice that the IP had not finished
removing the stopper.  The IP's left index finger was crushed
in between the stopper and the ramp causing a severe cut.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Poor  supervision  and  communication  as  the  driller  did  not  make  sure  that  the  IP  had  finished  the  job 

Stopper 
being 
removed 

Pinch Point 

assigned to him. 

•  Change of procedure during task.   

o  Normal procedure is to lift off the ramp, from the trailer, high enough so that the trailer can pull 

out from under the load.  Then off load the ramp in place.  

o  The driller decided to have the IP remove the stoppers on the side opposite the forklift.   
o  The injured ended up being in a position where he was not full view of the driller.  
o  The driller decided to lift the load again without checking to determine if the injured person had 

removed the pins and his hands were out of harms way. 

 

Improve lifting competency of the crew and supervisors. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 
•  Failure to follow Management of Change (MOC). 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2008 

