Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 51 
 

TRAPPED PRESSURE IN ANNULAR RESULTS 

IN A NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While undertaking maintenance on a 13 5/8” 10K Annular Blowout Preventer, one of four pull down bolts had 
been removed and removal of the second was underway when the annular cap was suddenly ejected from the 
annular body a distance of 4 to 5 ft up from the assembly.  The cap landed slightly off centre back on top of the 
annular.  The three remaining pull down bolts were sheared when the cap was ejected.  There were no injuries 
to personnel. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Subsequent  examination  of  the  stripping  accumulator  bottle  bladder  showed  that  it  had  ruptured  and  as  a 
consequence,  the  nitrogen  pre-charge  was  not  confined  to  the  accumulator  system,  instead,  pressure  was 
introduced  under  the  annular  operating  piston  and  “locked  in”  due  to  the  design  of  the  control  system  pipe-
work which incorporated quick disconnect couplings.  These quick disconnect couplings only allow fluid to flow 
when the male and female elements are made up.  If disconnected as in this case, they act as block valves 
preventing  fluid  return  from  the  top  of  the  operating  piston.    When  the  cap  locking  jaws  were  released,  the 
force on the piston was transferred to the four pull down bolts via the annular cap.  The bolts are not designed 
as load bearing devices and after the first one was removed, the force on the piston was sufficient to shear the 
remaining bolts and eject the cap. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions to 
rig and maintenance personnel: 
 
1.  Review Safety Alert. 
2.  Raise awareness of isolation policy within Permit to Work System. 
3.  All systems to be isolated from all actual and potential energy sources and bled off prior to maintenance 

and controlled through the permit to work system. 

4.  Specific risk assessment for removing annular cap to involve pressure hazards and to be reviewed by a 

mechanic, a hydraulics engineer, or a person who has a through understanding of the system.  

5.  Bleed manifold with gauge equipment to be considered for visually checking pressure/bleeding pressure 

6.  Consider  undoing  locating  pull  down  bolts  first,  then  undoing  locating  jaws  to  reduce  likelihood  of 

and checking integrity of the bladder.  

personnel standing over annular cap.   

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued December 2003 

