Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 14  
 

FATALITY – WORKER STRUCK BY FALLING PIPE TUB 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two pipe tubs had been set out from the edge of the lease with a pole truck. Two trucks were called to the 
lease to pick up the tubs which were parallel to each other and about 8 ft. (2.4 m) apart with one tub about 8 
ft. (2.4 m) further back from the other.  The first truck tractor, with a lo-boy trailer, lined up to the pipe tub that 
was furthest back.  He then hooked up chains to a set of pipe racks that were sitting on the tub.  He then 
hooked  up  his  loading  sling  to  the  tub  and  began  loading  the  tub.    While  the  first  truck  driver  was  getting 
ready, a second truck, with a hi-boy, had pulled in and lined up to the front tub.  The second driver had to 
chain several items to the top of his tub.  He had thrown three chains over the tub and began tightening the 
boomer on the chain that was furthest back on the tub.  The first truck driver winched his tub forward and 
brought it about 15 ft. (4.6 m) ahead of the roll of his trailer, which was now even with the front tub.  The first 
truck driver started winching the tub again and the pipe tub slid to the side of the trailer.  He slacked off on 
the  winch  to  let  the  tub  back  down  and  to  re-align  the  trailer  to  the  tub.    As  soon  as  the  first  truck  driver 
slacked off the tub, it slid off of the side of the trailer.  The second truck driver turned toward the falling tub 
and  was  struck  in  the  chest  area.    To  avoid  being  crushed  by  the  falling  tub,  he  managed  to  get  clear; 
however, he died later from the force of the impact of the tub on his chest. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  The lowboy deck pin that should have been in the roll pin pocket was never found.   
  The load slid to the side, as it was being winched ahead.  There did not appear to be any reason to 

winch the load ahead since the tub was now positioned in the middle of his trailer. 

  The injured worker didn’t recognize his position as being in a danger zone. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

 

JSAs  for  loading  were  reviewed  and  revised  to  ensure  workers  do  not  stand  between  loads  while 
one is being winched on. 

  Workers, in the area of winched loads were reminded that only one load can be winched on at a time 

so that all workers in the area could concentrate on one load at a time. 

  Preparing another load is will not be done within 20 ft. (6 m) of a load being winched or loaded until 

the load is securely in place on the trailer. 

  Drivers were reminded that the deck pins should be in place prior to loading. 
  Unless there is a soft spot under the load, all drivers were instructed to roll back under loads as they 

are winching the load onto the trailer deck. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2012 

