Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 11  
 

SERIOUS INJURY RESULTS FROM FALL FROM LADDER  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The injured person (IP) was involved in a maintenance campaign on light fittings.  While reinstalling a light 
fitting the IP fell from a ladder to the ground.  
 
The  IP  had  climbed  up  the  extension  ladder  to  collect  a  screwdriver  he  left  on  a  beam  above  the  safety 
shower light fitting.  While he was at the beam he noticed two other tools (shifting spanner, etc.).  He decided 
to  carry  these  down  to  his  tool  bag  on  the  ground.    He  then  commenced  descending  the  ladder  with  the 
screwdriver in one hand and the other tools in his other hand using only his fingertips on the ladder.  While 
descending  the  ladder,  he  lost  his  balance  when  his  foot  slipped  from  the  ladder  rung.    He  was  unable  to 
maintain a grip on the ladder and fell backwards.  
 
The  IP  landed  on  his  buttocks  and  then  continued  falling  backwards  hitting  his  head.    He  was  knocked 
unconscious.  IP suffered fractures to 4 vertebrae in his lower back.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The IP originally was using a step ladder to perform the task but due to the uneven nature of the ground 

decided to use an extension ladder that could be secured to the pipe work.  

•  The PTW and JSA covered the use of step ladder and Elevated Work Platform (EWP) only.  
•  The EWP was available but could not be used due limited access.  
•  The IP knew of the “three (3) points contact rule, but failed to apply the rule when using the ladder.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Reiterated through tool box / safety meetings the importance of the three (3) points of contact rule when 

using ladders.  
Issued a Standing Order regarding the use of ladders.  
Included a Standing Order on use of ladders in the next revision of safe procedures manual.  

• 
• 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  See the “Safe Use of Ladders” in the IADC Safety Topic Book.  Also see Section 16 and Section 
20 of the IADC HSE Reference Guide. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2007 

