Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 29  

 

PIPE USED AS ANCHORAGE POINT ON RIG FLOOR  

BECOMES A PROJECTILE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  drill  crew  was  in  the  process  of  placing  the  Tubing  Hanger  Running  Tool  (THRT)  back  into  its 
transporting/handling  skid.    The  tool  was  being  held by  air  winches  to  control  swing  due  to  rig  motion  and 
high winds.  The port bow winch line was strung behind an approximately 12 inch (0.31 meters) hold-back 
pipe on the Port side V-door King post.  This 18 pound (8.2 kilogram) hold back pipe is normally used during 
this type of operation.  Due to the tool weight and motion, the hold-back pipe broke off, flying approximately 
30  feet  (9.1  meters)  and  striking  the  Chiksan®  rack  on  the  starboard  wind  wall.    This  action  caused  the 
THRT to swing and strike the transporting/handling skid, knocking it over.  No one was injured but the pipe, 
which became a projectile as it broke off, passed within 4 feet (1.2 meters) of 3 different employees. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The  hold-back  pipes  were  installed  before  the  industry  practice  of  regular  inspection  of  lifting  devices, 
Non-Destructive  Testing  (NDT)  or  Non-Destructive  Evaluation  (NDE)  inspections.    Because  it  is  not  a 
pad eye or other similar device on the inspection list, it did not occur to anyone to add it to the inspection 
list.  Although  it  had  been  treated  as  if  it  were  a  part  of  the  V-Door  King  post,  it  was  not.    It  had  been 
added to the V-Door King post at least fifteen years ago. 

2.  The crew did not recognize that their use of an uncertified anchor point was a hazard, which meant that 

the crew did not add the pipe to the rig inspection list for annual certification. 

3.  The crew reviewed a JSA for laying down drill pipe riser prior to beginning the job.  The JSA for the Drill 
Pipe Riser did not include handling the THRT. When the THRT appeared at the rotary table, the drill crew 
had  a  Tool  Box  Talk  prior  to  picking  up  the  THRT  and  placing  it  in  its  transport  skid.  However,  the 
existing JSA was not revised nor was a new JSA written for picking up and handling the THRT.  Revising 
the JSA to include this change might have made the crew aware of the way the THRT was handled and 
avoided the incident. 

4.  There was a job change and the JSA was not revised. 
 

Port V-door King Post after the pipe broke. 

 

 

Starboard V-Door King Post with identical pipe.  
(This was removed after the incident.) 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig supervisors and 
personnel in the following: 
 
1. 

Immediately conduct a Hazard Hunt on your rig for non-typical devices which are used as anchor points, 
lifting points or used to change direction of forces, such an air hoist cable.  If it can be qualified, add the 
device to the rig lifting-point inspection list, otherwise remove it immediately. 
 

2.  Review this incident with all crew members.  Emphasize the importance of being alert to changes in the 
job.  Remind them that a change in the job signals that it is time to stop the job, take a step back, and 
either revise the existing JSA or create a new JSA for the changes that are occurring. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2011 

