Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 15  
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

surroundings. 

WELDING OPERATION RESULTS IN A  

FIRE IN THE STORE ROOM 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Welders were trimming a guidepost located on the roof of the rig’s storeroom.  The insulation installed on the 
underside of the storeroom roof that was located below the area of hot work ignited and began to smolder, 
emitting  a  large  volume  of  toxic  smoke.    The  store  room  sustained  extensive  smoke  damage  but,  more 
importantly, there was a potential loss of rig equipment, materials and loss of life. 

  The  Job  Hazard  Analysis  did  not  take  into  consideration  the  effect  of  the  hotwork  on  the 

  No consideration was given to the previous installation of expanding foam sealant on the ceiling of 

storeroom to serve as insulation. 

  No consideration was given that the foam material would burn if heat was applied to it.   
  No fire watch was assigned in the storeroom during hotwork operation on the guidepost located on 

the roof of the storeroom. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

 

 

 

 

Instructed rig personnel that during the JSA process, the surrounding area (including up and down) 
must be taken into consideration during the planning phase. 

  Emphasized  the  importance  of  assigning  a  fire  watch  on  the  side  of  wall  or  roof  opposite  the 

welding/cutting operation.  
Instructed  rig  personnel  that  anytime  a  product  is  used  in  the  construction,  maintenance  or  repair 
process, it must be determined how the product will respond to potential situations that may arise in 
that area. 
Issued a maintenance bulletin stating that at no time shall “Expanding Foam” type insulation be used 
as an insulator, unless it meets NFPA A-6 specifications.   
Instructed rig maintenance personnel to inspect their rig and ensure that expanding foam is not being 
used inappropriately. 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2011 

