Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

ALERT 10 – 32 

HORSEPLAY RESULTS IN INJURIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two  roustabouts  were  cleaning  a  piece  of  equipment,  one  with  a  high  pressure  wash  down  gun  and  the 
other with a scrub broom.  The roustabout with the wash down gun asked the other to move out of the way 
so he wouldn’t get sprayed.  The roustabout with the scrub broom waved the broom in the face of the other, 
and  oil  base  mud  with  soapy  water  and  diesel  splashed  into  the  other’s  face  and  ran  down  behind  his 
glasses into his eye.  The injured person had his eye flushed with water. 

Two  roustabouts  were  cleaning  mud  pits,  one  roustabout  was  on  top  and  the  other  was  in  the  pit.    The 
roustabout on top accidentally hosed the other employee, who in turn hosed down the man on top of the pits, 
and  an  argument  ensued.    The  result  was  the  worker  who  was  in  the  pit  picked  up  a  rock  and  struck  the 
other  in  the  buttocks.    The  injured  went  to  the  medic  and  was  given  a  pain  reliever  and  bed  rest  for  the 
remainder of the day. 

Improper use of water hose and scrub broom.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
 
  One act of horseplay leads to another. 
  Non-compliance with company instructions against horseplay. 
  Lack of safety awareness by individuals involved. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The company held safety meetings across the rig fleet to address horseplay.   
  The rigs involved immediately held a safety stand down with crews to emphasize the point that horseplay 
will not be tolerated.  Safety Stand-Downs are when everyone on location is pulled together to discuss 
safety issues in an impromptu safety meeting, and they are quite effective and to the point. 
Immediate  disciplinary  action  resulted  from  both  cases,  as  per  the  company’s  zero  tolerance  toward 
horseplay.   

 

  The company discussed a previous horseplay incident when two individuals were involved in horseplay 
(wrestling  in  the  yard)  and  when  one  stood  up  to  walk  away,  the  other  tackled  him  from  behind.    Two 
knee surgeries later, the person who was tackled still suffers with knee pain and the prospect of another 
surgery.   

  There is no room for horseplay on oil well locations.  We are all responsible for our own actions and if 

horseplay occurs there will be immediate consequences.   

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2010 

