Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 07  
 

FAILED “O” RINGS RESULT IN DROPPED DRILL STRING 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  operation  was  back  reaming.    During  this  operation,  the  air  supply  to  the  drum  clutch  of  the  draw 
works suddenly bled off, resulting in the top drive along with the drill string to moving down approximately 10 
feet (4-meters).  The drill pipe elevator came in contact with the rotary table resulting in damage to the bails 
and the link tilt hydraulic cylinders. 
 

 

Damaged equipment 

Re-Set Valve 

Failed brittle “O” Rings 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Combination of leaking o-rings and the tattletale hole being plugged.  The o-rings were found to be brittle and 
allowed air to leak by the shaft into the end cap.  The tattletale hole was found to be plugged and caused the 
pressure to build up in the end cap exerting pressure against the end of the valve stem inside the body and 
shifted the valve into the vent position which shut off the air to and dumped air from the drum clutch. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  As an immediate corrective action, the o-rings were changed on this valve. 
2.  Rig supervisors were instructed to install a keeper pin on the drillers console to prevent the reset handle 
from  moving  into  the  vent  position  without  removing  the  keeper  pin.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
welding a pin tab on the drillers console on the first rig move. 

3.  Contact  the  valve  manufacturer  and  inform  them  of  the  incident  and  see  if  they  have  had  a  similar 

incident in the past. 

4.  Maintenance manager is to obtain the recommended maintenance and inspection procedures from reset 

valve manufacturer and add the procedures to the company’s Preventive Maintenance System. 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2009 

