Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

FALL / OPEN HOLE, LTI INCIDENT 

 
ALERT 05 – 11 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Night Toolpusher climbed a rig floor fixed ladder to the Top Drive System (TDS) walkway located above 
the  Drawworks  in  order  to  inspect  the TDS.    He  stepped  back  into  the  ladder  access  opening  (open  hole) 
and fell approximately 5 meters (approximately 16 feet), landing on the rig floor below.  The landing resulted 
in a fracture to the left arm and various cuts & abrasions.   

•  The ladder opening that provided access to the walkway did not have a hatch to secure the open hole and 
protective  barriers  were  not  in  place  to  prevent  a  fall  through  this  opening.  (No  signage  displayed  to 
indicate the fall potential) 

•  The injured person chose not to wear a full body harness and did not utilize any type of fall protection even 

though the fixed ladder had a ladder safety system that included a fall arrest system installed. 

•  The lack of a formal risk assessment allowed this identifiable hazard to go unrecognized and actions were 

not taken to mitigate the risk to anywhere close to an acceptable or even tolerable level. (JRA) 

•  A complete lack of individual / personal risk assessment as the employee commenced this particular task. 
•  The employee displayed an unacceptable level of risk tolerance. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 

As a result of this incident, immediate remedial actions have been implemented to prevent a reoccurrence. 
Sadly once again this is merely a reactive measure to an incident which should never have happened in the 
first place.  We must be proactive and manage our safety effectively by using the training and safety tools 
available  to  us.    Clearly  the  outcome  could  have  been  much  more  tragic  and  the  lesson  to  be  learned  is 
clear.  Do not take shortcuts and remember no matter how straight forward or simple a task might appear, if 
you  do  not  consider  the  consequences  and  correctly  eliminate  the  obvious  risk  then  we  cannot  expect  to 
control the outcome. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2005 

 

