Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 06 
 

NEAR MISS—DROPPED JOINT OF CASING 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  running  casing  in  the  hole,  the  rig  floor  crew  stabbed  a  joint  of  9  5/8”  casing.    The  stabber  then 
removed the single joint pick-up elevators.  The power tongs were placed around the pipe, but it was found 
that they were too low for the make-up process.  In order to get the power tongs in the proper position, the air 
winch operator utilized the rig floor winch to hoist them, but the tongs came up at an angle causing them to 
bind on the casing.  The binding of the tongs on the casing resulted in the upward motion of the tongs to be 
transferred to the casing joint allowing the air winch to lift the joint of casing.  This caused it to fall across the 
rig floor and lean against the derrick.    
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The winch operator failed to notice that the tongs had jammed on the casing. He also failed to notice that the 
winch was lifting the joint of casing.  There was nothing in the JSA for running casing addressing the process 
of adjusting the height of the casing tongs should they be too low on the pipe to allow make-up.  There was 
no procedure to identify the winch operator’s competency  for various tasks.  It is easy to see in retrospect 
how this kind of incident can happen.  The air hoist is rated to lift over 6000 pounds so it could easily lift the 
weight of the tongs and the joint of casing.  It didn’t take much to lift the casing pin from the box of the casing 
in the rotary table.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
A  safety  meeting  was  immediately  held  to  discuss  what  went  wrong.    The  incident  was  reported  to  the 
corporate office the same day it occurred.   
 
•  Rig  crews  were  instructed  that  all  JSAs  addressing  running  casing  should  be  reviewed  to  include  the 

step “raising and lowering tongs”, along with the hazards identified in this incident.  

 
Rig crews were also instructed to identify those crew members who will operate the air hoist, based upon 
each employee’s demonstrated level of competency.  Certain air hoist operations require a higher level of 
competency, such as hoisting personnel and making unusual or heavy lifts. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2007 

