Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 37   
 

EMPLOYEE FALLS FROM DERRICK BOARD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew stopped tripping in the hole to fill the pipe.  The rig is a cold weather rig equipped with a "warming 
hut"  on  the  derrick  board.    Filling  the  pipe  was  going  to  take  about  fifteen  minutes  so  the  derrickman 
unhooked  his  positioning  rope  and  entered  the  warming  hut.    The  derrickman  stated  he  disconnected  his 
positioning rope so he could close the hut door.  After the pipe was filled he heard the blocks running up and 
exited the hut to get a stand of drill pipe.  When he left the hut, the derrickman forgot to reattach the derrick 
board positioning rope to his harness.  As he reached to latch the drill pipe in the elevators, he fell from the 
derrick board.  His fall was arrested by the board's self retracting lifeline (i.e., SRL) which left him hanging 
below  the  derrick  board.    The  crew  swung  the  air  hoist  line  to  him  and  he  was  able  to  get  his  feet  on  the 
weighted ball and get back on the board.  The SRL and harness were replaced and taken out of service due 
to the impact. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Following the incident the derrickman stated he was preoccupied with a personal issue and did not have 

•  The derrickman worked derricks for 2.5 years; however even this experience did not ensure he 

his mind on the job at hand.   

performed his job properly.   

•  The trip was not a "typical job" for these crewmembers.  Two crewmembers did not show up for work 

therefore, the crew "switched" positions.  The man who fell from the board was actually the driller (DR).  
The rig manager (RM) was running the rig. 

•  The driller (RM) did not ensure either visually or verbally that the derrickman (DR) was properly tied off 

before the blocks left the rig floor. 

•  The  heater  in  the  hut  was  not  working  and  a  previous  derrickman  had  unplugged  the  communication 
system to use his own 110 volt heater.  When his hitch was over he removed his heater and did not plug-
in the communication system.   

•  The  derrickman  (DR)  that  fell  was  complacent  and  did  not  investigate  why  the  communication  system 

was not working. 

•  The derrickman (DR) removed his positioning rope so he could close the door to the warming hut.  It was 

stated this is common practice as the design of the door does not allow it to close "around" the rope.  
The derrickman (DR) DID NOT remove his SRL as the cable is thin enough to allow the door to close 
with it attached.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 
•  At a minimum the Safe Work Procedures Handbook requires the driller to review a JSA for ALL trips with 
crewmembers  emphasizing  hazard  recognition  for  the  different  procedures  involved  in  tripping  the  drill 
string.  

It is absolutely critical to concentrate on the job at hand.   

•  Special precautions must be taken for jobs performed by individuals working outside their normal roles. 
•  The  company’s  Safe  Work  Procedures  Handbook  requires  the  driller  to  ensure  at  any  time  during 
tripping operations that when the derrickman leaves then reenters the board area he must ensure that 
the he is properly tied off and ready for tripping operations to resume. 

•  The company’s “Driller's Ten Commandments” first commandment mandates: 

o  Thou  shall  never  raise  the  blocks  above  the  rig  floor  until  you  confirm  the  derrickman  is  properly 
attached  to  fall  restraint.    Check  both  visually  and  verbally,  use  your  eyes  and  the 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

communication  box.    This  procedure  shall  be  followed  every  time  there  is  break  in  the  tripping 
process such as breaking circulation or any time the derrickman leaves the board area. 

•  Additionally, employees working on the rig floor during trips or any time personnel are in the derrick, they 

should assist the driller in monitoring the derrickman's activities. 

•  Rig  equipment  such  as  the  communication  system  should  NEVER  be  disabled.    Provisions  must  be 
made  to  ensure  nonfunctioning  equipment  such  as  the  heater  and  the  communication  system  are 
working  or  scheduled  for  repair.    Formal  Action  Items  must  be  written  and  entered  in  the  Action  Item 
Tracking Database to ensure repairs are completed.  Alternative management controls/precautions must 
be implemented in the event equipment cannot be repaired prior to initiating work. 

•  Warming huts should be designed to allow the door to close with the positioning rope attached. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2007 

