Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 02  
 

LACK OF COORDINATION DURING RIG-UP LEADS TO INJURIES 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  rig-up,  rig  personnel  were  attempting  to  install  a  diagonal  stabilization  brace  on  the  substructure; 
however, the brace would not fit into place.  A forklift was used to push the substructure which would allow 
the brace to line up and be pinned.  At the same time, two employees were attempting to install the rolling 
catwalk  directly  over  the  open  cellar  (approximately  15  feet/4.5m  above  ground  level).    When  the  forklift 
pushed on the substructure, the wheels of the catwalk, which the employees were standing on, sheared off.  
Both employees and the catwalk fell to the ground.  One employee fell to the ground and the other fell into 
the cellar.  Both employees suffered injuries. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Brace Installation - The ground crew was attempting to pin the wrong diagonal brace into position; it was 
approximately 4 inches (10cm) longer than the correct brace.  In addition, the brace was not marked as 
to its installed position in the substructure. 

•  Powered Equipment - A forklift was used to push on the substructure to help position the brace.  Added 

stress was placed upon the substructure and the wheels on the catwalk. 

•  Simultaneous Operations – The diagonal brace and substructure were being positioned at the same time 
other employees were working at height in a part of the substructure in order to install the rolling catwalk.  
The risk was not recognized by crew members and supervisors. 

•  Pre-Job JSA - The danger of two separate tasks being performed in the same area and at the same time 

was not highlighted in the pre-job safety meeting and JSA discussion. 

•  Stop Work Authority - Personnel on site did not stop the job/task to make sure the employees working at 

height were in a safe position prior to bumping the substructure with the forklift. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig  Manager(s)  were  reminded  to  make  certain  that  stabilization  braces  are  clearly  marked  to  identify 
their correct installation position within the substructure and are to discuss the brace positioning with the 
crew members prior to attempting installation. 

•  Rig  Managers  were  instructed to remind crews, during the pre-job safety meeting and JSA discussion, 
that if it takes extra effort (example, the use of a forklift) to install a brace, a stop task is to be called to 
review the process and any safety concerns, then take steps to prevent an incident from occurring. 

•  Site  supervisors  were  instructed  to  be  aware  of  simultaneous  operations  during  a  rig  move  and  are  to 

make certain that that the substructure is clear of employees prior to installing stabilization braces. 

•  Site supervisors were also instructed to remind ALL personnel, during pre-move safety meeting and JSA 
discussion, that they must remain aware of simultaneous operations and are to take steps to ensure their 
safety and the safety of those around them. 
Instructed  all  Rig  Managers  and  Truck  Pushers  to  remind  ALL  personnel,  during  pre-move  and 
subsequent  safety  meetings,  that  they  must  remain  aware  of  their  surroundings  at  all  times  that  they 
have the responsibility to STOP and report any unsafe task. 

• 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2013 

