Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 07 

TANK WELDING – HIGH POTENTIAL INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig accumulator supply  tank required maintenance which included the task of welding on the tank and 
piping.  The rig site senior mechanic was walking within the vicinity of the job being performed and noticed 
the welder welding on the tank.  The operation was immediately stopped by the mechanic when he realized 
the potential explosive atmosphere that existed.  The tank itself had not been purged.  The tank lid was still 
closed and secured in place.  The contents of the tank had not been emptied nor cleaned prior to the welding 
taking place.  The welder was not aware of the tank contents.  There was not a well defined fire watch being 
utilized.    A  fire  extinguisher  or  pressurized  water  hose  was  not  within  the  working  vicinity  as  required  by 
policy  and  the  Permit  to  Work  procedure.    Although  a  PTW  document  had  been  issued,  the  appropriate 
personnel  were  not  involved.    The  document  had  been  incorrectly  filled  out  and  many  details  were  not 
followed  as  required,  including  the  pre-job  safety  check  off  list.    The  designated  fire  watch  for  this 
maintenance  work  to  be  performed  had  become  involved  in  other  duties  at  the  Rig-Site  office.    A 
replacement fire watch had not been confirmed either. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  Lack of pre-job planning and hazard assessment (JSA) not implemented or carried out.  
•  Personnel directly involved in the task failed to recognize the hazard potential. 
• 
• 

Inadequate safety leadership and poor job planning by rig site management. 
Incorrect implementation of the Permit to Work (PTW) system.  All aspects of this document had not 
been followed or utilized. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Training for all rig site personnel on the understanding and utilization of the PTW system. 
•  Training for employees directly involved in future and potential fire-watch duties.  
•  Verifying the qualifications of all on-site rig welders and their understanding of maintenance and work 

procedures involving pressure vessels and flammable liquids or gases and the potential for explosion.   

•  Pre-job check by the Senior Rig Site Manager prior to and following the signing of the Permit to Work 

•  Senior rig site personnel to communicate the responsibilities of employees to perform duties such as fire-

watch or confined-space entry monitoring and compliance.   

System.   

Welded area 

 

:

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2010 

