Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 01 – 02 
 

MAN-RIDING WINCH OPERATIONS 

NEAR MISS INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After completion of logging operations, a man was lowered with a designated air winch to the top of the riser 
slip joint to disconnect the compensator line. During the task, the man-rider winch line unexpectedly parted 
and the man fell approximately 30 feet to the sea. He was recovered quickly and sustained no serious injury. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Following the investigation, it appears the cable may have been damaged some days before when it was 
caught by the BOP Overhead Crane transverse carriage and was pinched against the diverter housing. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following to operations 
personnel: 
 
To prevent this type of incident from occurring in the future, the following should be undertaken: 
 
•  Confirm that a JSA identifying all hazards is developed for man riding operations. These include but are 

not limited to possible damage to the cable, equipment malfunction, communications and procedures. 

•  A pre-job safety meeting should be held and the appropriate procedures reviewed. 
•  Tasks should be reviewed and where possible, consideration should be given to modify equipment or the 

task in order to reduce the need to utilize man-rider type operations. 

•  Ensure that air hoist operators have received the necessary training to lift personnel. 
•  Preventative Maintenance Program should include routine periodic inspection of all winches including 

man-riding winches. 

o  Spool off, clean and visually inspect cable on all man-riding winches on a routine basis. Replace 

damaged or questionable cable. 

o  Visually inspect the area around the sheave and the path of the cable to ensure it cannot be 

damaged or snagged on any equipment. The cable path should be reviewed with the cable in a 
taut as well as slack condition. 

o  Load test winches to the recommended Safe Working Load as recommended by the winch 

o 

manufacturer or your preventative maintenance program. 
Inspect and test each winch, including brakes, to ensure they operate correctly. Repair as 
necessary. 

o  Ensure that the control lever returns to the neutral position automatically. 

•  Offshore operations may also include the following: 

o  Review Man Overboard procedures to ensure all crew members are familiar with their duties 

including launch procedures and operation of the designated rescue craft. Periodic drills that are 
properly documented should be held to maintain competency of the crews. 

o  Before beginning man-riding operations over water, ensure that the rescue craft, is in proper 

working condition, and if a standby boat is at the rig, alert the boat crew of the operation. 

 
 
Additional references include IADC Safety Alert 00-36 and the IADC Accident Reference Guide 
Section 3.7. IADC Note:  The Accident Reference Guide is out of publication.  Refer to the HSE Reference 
Guide Sections:  3.7 and Section 19.  The HSE Reference Guide was issue in January 2004. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2001 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2001 

