Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 06 
 

FATALITY WHILE TRYING TO FILL UP CASING 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig’s crew was filling the first joint of 133/8" casing to test the shoe.  To accomplish this, the crew used a 
rubber  hose  connected  to  the  high  pressure  standpipe  manifold  and  utilized  the  high  pressure  mud  pump 
system to transfer fill fluid to the casing.  The standpipe hose connection was located lower than the main 
piping.  This formed a trap for lost circulation material (LCM) to accumulate at the connection point.  Three 
members of the crew were holding the hose in the casing opening when the pump was activated.  The crew 
noticed a lack of flow from the hose nozzle.  At the same time a 2,000 PSI pressure spike registered on the 
standpipe gauge.  This spike and lack of flow occurred just before there was a violent release of pressure.  
The sudden influx of high pressure fluid into the hose caused it to kick upward and strike five workers on the 
rig floor. 
 
One worker died from a fatal head injury.  Four other workers were struck by the hose or high pressure fluid 
which resulted in various non-life threatening injuries to all.  Forty-four operation hours of lost time occurred 
while rig operations were shut down to carry out an investigation, and running a wiper trip prior to running 
casing. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Supervisors on the rig deviated from the agreed game plan to use the top drive system (TDS) to fill the 

casing.   

(charge pump).   

•  The  casing  was  filled  using  the  high  pressure  system  instead  of  the  low  pressure  mud  tank  system 

•  No Hazard Assessment (JSA) or pre-job safety meeting was conducted before this work started 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company reminded rig and operations 
personnel of the following: 
 
•  Company policy requires that the TDS or service company, fills up machines that should be used to fill 

•  Company  procedures  manual  require  that  low  pressure  pumping  equipment  is  to  be  used  when  filling 

•  To prevent hose movement, when filling casing with a low pressure hose, the hose must be tied down 

casing whenever possible   

casing with a hose.   

prior to starting the pump. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2008 

