Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 03 – 10 (REVISED) 
 

DECANTING SYNTHETIC BASED MUD  

CAN RESULT IN A FLASH FIRE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The purpose of this alert is to remind everyone of a frequently overlooked hazard involving Synthetic Based Mud (SBM) 
additives.    SBM  is  typically  shipped  to  rig  locations  in  tote  tanks.    Once  on  location,  it  is  usually  gravity  fed  to  mud  pits 
through flexible hoses.  Synthetic Based Mud additives with a flash point of 73F (23C) meets the standard of a Class 1C 
flammable  liquid.    (Check  the  SBM  additive  MSDS  sheet  for  flammability.)    Decanting  SBM  additives  with  a  low  flash 
point without bonding and or grounding can result in an explosion.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Among  the  many  variables  that  can  determine  when  and  where  a  liquid  transfer  explosion  and  fire  takes  place  are  the 
following:  the temperature of the liquid (which influences vapor quantity); the air temperature; the flash point of the liquid; 
the upper and lower explosive limits of the material being transferred (there may be too much or too little vapor to explode 
when a spark occurs); the relative humidity at the time of the transfer (which has a bearing on static buildup); the clothing 
worn by the worker (wool, for example, can generate more static than cotton); the type of containers used; and whether or 
not the source container has built up a charge before decanting begins.  Plastic containers can accumulate a significant 
static  electrical  charge,  but  the  charge  cannot  disperse  uniformly  throughout  the  material.    Because  of  this bonding and 
grounding are not effective on non-conducting containers.   
 
Electrical charges can build up in flammable liquids when the liquids flow through piping systems or when they are agitated 
in their storage containers as a result of mechanical movement or splashing.  The proper bonding and grounding of the 
piping system is often enough to control this static buildup.  However, if rapid flow rates are used to transfer the liquid into 
a  storage  tank,  high  electrical  potentials can occur  on  the surface  of  the liquid in  the  tank.    The  rate  of accumulation  of 
static charge may be much greater than the liquid's ability to transfer it to the grounded metal storage vessel.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
Bonding can be done to eliminate the difference in electrical potential between two or more objects.   
 
•  The  size  of  the  bonding  wire  is  usually  based  on mechanical  strength  rather than on  current-carrying  capacity.  The 
maximum resistance of the grounding conductor should be less than one megohm to ensure the dissipation of static 
electricity. 

•  The attachment point on both objects must be solid and secure and should be made on a bare metal surface. 
•  Using a pressure clamping device (screw-on or spring-loaded) is a good way to ensure a positive connection. 
•  The  connection  must  be  made  prior  to  beginning  the  transfer  of  material  between  the  containers.    If  the  bonding  is 
done after the transfer, the static charge buildup could result in a spark as the bond wire is connected to one of the 
containers. 

 
Grounding 
 
Grounding  an  object  serves  a  different  purpose  than  bonding.    Bonding  eliminates  the  difference  in  potential  between 
containers that are bonded together, but it will not eliminate the potential difference between an object and the ground.  To 
ensure that a static charge will not create a spark as a result of this difference, a conductive path must be provided to the 
earth.  A proper ground will provide a means for continuously discharging a charged, conductive body to the earth.  It is 
important that the grounding system be checked to ensure that there is continuity and proper resistance.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued March 2003 

