Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

HELICOPTER WHEEL SNAGS HELIDECK NET 

Near Miss with High Severity Potential 

 
ALERT 09 – 31 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

Just before lifting off the helideck, the helicopter moved slightly forward and slid to the side causing the net 
on that side to buckle up and catch  on the  wheel.  The Helicopter Landing Officer (HLO) observed the net 
caught on the wheel and radioed to inform the pilot.  Fortunately the net self-released from the wheel as it 
was lifted about 30 cm (1 ft) off the helideck.  

Potential Consequences:   

Dynamic  rollover  resulting  in  multiple  (including  fatal)  injuries  and  extensive  property  damage  including 
destruction or loss of the helicopter overboard.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. 
2. 
 

The helideck net was not tensioned as recommended.   
The helicopter moved forward and slid to the side causing the net to buckle up.   

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Ensure  that  the  HLO  and  his  crew  are  well  trained  to  inspect  the  helideck  and  surrounding  areas;  be 
equipped  with  a  constant  means  of  communication  with  the  pilot;  and  be  fully  alert  during  landing  and 
takeoff for any sign of danger and know when to immediately inform the pilot.   
•  Check helideck net for proper tension (see below) before all helicopter arrivals.  
•  Comply  with  regional  regulations  governing  helideck  nets.  One  standard  for  guidance  on  offshore 
helidecks is CAP 437 which goes into great detail on the layout and tensioning of helideck nets. (Rigs in 
the  United  States  Gulf  of  Mexico  are  not  required  to  have  helideck  nets  so  there  are  no  governing 
regulations for the US GOM.)  CAP 437 states the following concerning tensioning the net:  
o  Tautly-stretched  rope  netting  should  be  provided  to  aid  the  landing  of  helicopters  with  wheeled 
undercarriages  in  adverse  weather  conditions.    The  intersections  should  be  knotted  or  otherwise 
secured to prevent distortion of the mesh.  It is preferable that the rope be 20 mm (0.787 in) diameter 
sisal  (strong  fiber  rope),  with  a  maximum  mesh  size  of  200  mm  (7.87  in).    The  rope  should  be 
secured  every  1.5  meters round  the  landing  perimeter  and  tensioned  to  at  least  2225  N  (500  lbs).   
….netting  may  be  made  of  other  material  but  should  not  be  constructed  of  polypropylene-type 
material which is known to readily deteriorate and flake when exposed to weather.  Tensioning to a 
specific  value  may  be  impractical  offshore.  As  a  rule  of  thumb,  it  should  not  be  possible  to 
raise  any  part  of  the  net  by  more  than  approximately  250  mm  (7.8  in)  above  the  helideck 
surface when applying a vigorous vertical pull by hand.  

 
References: 
Company’s Helicopter Operations Guidelines:  “Helideck tension, if fitted with a net.”  
U.K. Civil Aviation Authority, CAP 437 Offshore Helicopter Landing Areas – Guidance on Standards, 
at 
Sixth 
http://www.caa.co.uk/docs/33/CAP437.PDF  The  above  info  on  helideck  netting  is  in  chapter  3,  page  12, 
Section 7.3.  
 

December 

document 

Edition, 

2008. 

entire 

seen 

The 

can 

be 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2009 

