Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 14 - 01 

 

 

INTERNAL EXPLOSION RUPTURES CROWN MOUNTED COMPENSATOR PIPING 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
Two  employees  were  in  the  derrick  equalizing  the  internal  pressure  between  Composite  Air  Pressure  Vessels  (CAPV)  on  the  Crown  Mounted 
Compensator (CMC) when an ignition occurred inside the system.  Either heat generated by adiabatic compression or static generated by the air 
transfer  led  to  ignition  inside  the  CAPV.    Thereafter,  the  associated  raise  in  pressure  and  temperature  resulted  in  the  interconnecting  piping 
rupturing.    Two  employees  received  non-life  threatening  injuries  and  were  subsequently  transported  to  a  shore-based  medical  facility  for  further 
treatment. 

Failed CAPV and Interconnected Pipe 

CAPV Outlet Flange 

 

 

 

 

Ruptured Interconnected Pipe 

Ruptured Interconnected Pipe 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  Combustion occurs because of a combination of three elements: heat, fuel, oxidizing agent (e.g. oxygen). 
•  High temperature is a result of rapid pressure increase in a pressurized air system.  The CAPV Bottle that was being brought on-line was at a 

much lower pressure than the operating system pressure. 

•  A fuel source in the CAPV Bottle ignited due to the high temperature generated by the air transfer or static that was caused by the rapid air 

 

 

transfer.   
The temperature rise generated by the air transfer exceeded the melting temperature of the CAPV liner. 

• 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 
• 
• 

The company notified the manufacturer of the event to assist in the investigation. 
The company held safety stand-downs to review the incident and discuss the lessons learned. 
The company developed specific work instructions to bring CAPV online in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations which included 
following a cool down cycle while filling CAPV bottles with air. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2014 

