 

 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 23  

FAILURE TO TORQUE DRILL PIPE RESULTS IN SERIOUS NEAR MISS EVENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
The crew had made up a stand of drill pipe in the mousehole.  After hoisting the stand out of the mousehole, and while it 
was  still  hanging  in  the  elevators,  the  crew  began  to  make  up  a  float  sub  to  the  bottom  of  the  stand  using  the  iron 
roughneck.    Unknown  to  them,  when  the  stand  was  originally  made  up  in  the  mousehole,  the  connection  (tool  joint) 
between  the  top  and  middle  joints  did  not  get  fully  torqued  thereby  creating  a  “loose”  connection.    When  the  iron 
roughneck  was  engaged  to  spin  the  bottom  joint  of  the  stand  to  make  it  up  into  the  float  sub,  it  also  backed  out  the 
“loose” connection between the middle joint and top joint of drill pipe, separating the bottom two joints of the stand from 
the top joint.  The bottom two joints fell damaging the hand rails on the rig floor before continuing off the floor and coming 
to rest against the substructure.  No injuries occurred. 

Damage to Handrail 

Typical Iron Roughneck 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

Incorrect Torque Procedure – The iron roughneck operator applied the correct torque to the tool joint, but he did not 
notice  that  the  jaws  had  bottomed  out;  i.e.,  the  torque  was  not  applied  to  the  tool  joint,  just  the jaws.    He  did  not 
verify that the tool joint was tight before removing the machine from the pipe. 
Low  Quality  JSA  /  Work  Plan  -  The  JSA  /  Work  Plan  and  review  did  not  address  the  correct  procedure  for  the 
specific operation (in this case, installing a float sub), nor the specific hazards associated with the task. 

• 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

The company reminded and instructed all employees on the iron roughneck torque procedure.  The machine 
operator must be aware of the operating procedure of the iron roughneck, especially in verifying that correct torque 
is applied to the tool joint and in paying attention to the position of the jaws when reaching the designated torque.  
When in doubt, reposition the jaws and reapply the torque to make sure that the tool joint is tight. 
The company also reminded all employees that the iron roughnecks should not be engaged to spin a stand to the 
right with weight hanging in the elevators. I.e., the Driller needs to slack weight off the stand when the pipe is being 
spun onto any tool or tool joint. 

• 

•  All employees were reminded of the company’s JSA / Work Plan.  The rig specific JSA / Work Plan must be written 

• 

to address the safest procedure for making up downhole tools and must clearly list all associated hazards and 
barriers to prevent an incident from occurring.  Contact the appropriate up-line supervisor if additional assistance 
and / or resources are needed.  
The company informed all rig crews that due to various tools associated with drilling operations, it is difficult to 
establish one set procedure to address all possible installations.  For example, a bit sub is typically attached to the 
bottom of the stand with chain tongs; a float sub can be stabbed onto the stump in the rotary to be made up 
conventionally; reamers and other longer equipment may need to be made up in the mousehole (using slips); etc.  
Therefore, the rig specific JSA / Work Plan for the installation of any particular downhole tool must clearly state the 
job steps, potential hazards, and steps to mitigate the hazards.  The crews were instructed to review their JSA / 
Work Plan prior to picking up the tools. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2013 

