Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 15 
 

SPINNING OUT PIPE WITH TOP DRIVE  

RESULTS IN INJURIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently two rig floor workers were injured while working on the rig floor.  The job at hand was pulling out of 
the hole, while pumping on the drill pipe.  The slips had been set and the pump was turned off.  The stand of 
pipe had been  broken out at the floor  with the  iron roughneck.  The mud bucket was placed around the drill 
pipe and the stand was picked up out of the box to allow the mud to drain.  After draining, the mud bucket was 
removed  and  the  stand  was  stabbed  back  into  the  box  end  of  the  drill  string  in  the  rotary.    The  Driller  then 
proceeded  to  break  out  the  upper  connection  from  the  top  drive,  using  its  hydraulic  pipe  handler.    Manual 
make-up tongs were placed on the pin end of the drill pipe stand to hold back-up, against the top drive’s spin 
out.    As  the  Driller  started  the  spin  out,  the  stand  jumped  out  of  the  box  and  swung  around  on  the  rig  floor, 
striking  employees.    The  two  employees  were  evacuated  to  a  local  hospital,  where  they  were  treated  and 
released for minor injuries.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The stand was not properly secured in the box and the top drive pipe handler did not fully break the connection 
at the saver sub (top of the stand).  The procedure had been in place as ‘standard oilfield practice’ to minimize 
mud spillage at the box end of the stand. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions to rig 
personnel:   
 
A procedure change is necessary to prevent recurrence of this incident.  
 

1.  After the pipe has been drained, spin the connection back up with the top drive.  
2.  Proceed to back out the top drive, with bottom connection spun up (not torqued up).  
3.  Repeat the pipe handler breakout, to ensure that the break is ready for spin out. 

 
This will stabilize the stand and prevent the pipe from jumping out of the box. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued April 2003 

