Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 40   
 

42 INCH DRIVE DOWN ADAPTER FALLS TO RIG FLOOR 

RESULTING IN A FATALITY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A rig had finished driving a threaded connection 42 inch conductor pipe to 282 ft. below the mud line (BML) 
utilizing  a  third  party  hydraulic  hammer.    Prior  to  rigging  down  the  hammer,  a  pre-job  meeting  was  held.  
After which, the crew commenced rigging down the hammer.  Slings were attached to the 12,000 lb. x 14 ft. 
drive  down  adapter  and  it  was  lifted  out  of  the  conductor  pipe  using  the  rig’s  traveling  block.    Soon  after 
clearing  the  conductor  pipe,  the  adapter  separated  from  its  lifting  plate  and  fell  9  ft.  to  the  rig  floor.    It 
contacted the edge of the 42 inch box before landing on the rig floor toward the starboard forward corner.  
One  floorman  was  struck  on  his  right  side  by  the  adapter  while  trying  to  escape,  sustaining  injuries  that 
subsequently proved to be fatal. Another floorman injured his right foot while escaping from the path of the 
adapter. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The welded-on lifting cap separated from the drive down adapter.   
 
2.  An investigation as to why the adapter separated is underway. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Both drive down adapters of this design have been removed from service pending further investigation.  
 
2.  Assign and reinforce accountability to ensure that all reasonable precautions have been taken to verify 
that customer provided 3rd party equipment meets applicable codes and is installed correctly on rigs.   

 
3.  As always when lifting heavy loads, use tag lines and air winches to position them to provide an 

additional buffer area for personnel. 

 
4.  Job Safety Analysis (JSAs) and Pre-Job meeting checklists should be reviewed and amended as 

appropriate.   

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2006 

