Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 22 
 

USE OF ROPE & BUCKET TO CATCH SAMPLES 

RESULTS IN A HAND INJURY 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a cementing job, the slurry was batch mixed in a 100 bbl 
Batch  Mixer  with  two  agitators.    The  assistant  cementer  used  a 
rope  with  a  can  to  take  a  sample  of  the  slurry  inside  the  tank.  
The  can  /  rope  became  wrapped  around  one  of  the  agitator’s 
shafts.  The employee managed to release the rope from his left 
hand, however the rope was pulled across his right hand, tearing 
through the glove and causing damage to 3 fingers and his palm.  
Due to the severity of the injury, his little and ring finger and part 
of his right hand were amputated.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The pre job inspection did not reveal the absence of a proper sampling outlet.  This resulted in the use of a rope 
and can instead of obtaining the sample from a sampling outlet.  In addition, the rotating agitator was close to 
the access hatch that was used as a sample point.  The inside of the batch mixer was dark and the employee 
could not see the fluid level or the position of the rope and bucket to the rotating agitator.  The employee did not 
receive adequate orientation on the operation of the batch mixer and did not understand the risks involved in this 
task.  Adequate supervision and appropriate risk assessment of the overall job was lacking.  Hazard 
identification process was absent on the rig site, at the base and when manufacturing this batch mixer.  There 
was also non-conformance with the company’s Lock Out / Tag Out procedures.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
•  STOPPED the practice of using a rope to take samples in any vessel with paddles or agitator. 
• 
• 

Instructed units to install proper sampling point on all Batch Mixers or vessels. 
If it is not possible to install a sampling point, the agitators must be shut off and the sample caught using a 
pole with can attached. 
Implement mandatory use of a hazard assessment and a JSA in all cementing operations (including 
routine jobs). 
Incorporate lessons learned from incident into company hand/finger awareness training package. 

• 
•  Requested that a stand down day be held company wide to reinforce the use of risk identification tools and 

• 

techniques. 

•  Share lessons learned with all companies that use mixing tanks with agitators i.e. STOP taking samples 

using the practice of dipping a can into an agitated pit. 

 
 
Note:  See IADC Alert 02 – 09 Rope Caught in Mud Pit Agitator Causes RWC 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2003 

