Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

SLIPS KNOCKED OVER RESULTING IN LTI FOOT INJURY 

 
ALERT 06 – 37  

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Well testing had been completed and the operation at the time was pulling 4½ inch production tubing out of 
the hole in single joints.  The rig had been pulling tubing for over 12 hours (6 hours on Injured Person’s (IP) 
tour and 6 on the previous tour).  A cable from the Spider / Single joint elevators snagged the slip handles 
causing them to fall over striking the injured person on the upper foot, behind the steel toe cap of his boot.  A 
fracture was found on the upper part of his right foot, resulting in an LTI. 

The  tubing  had  square-shouldered  tool  joints  which  occasionally  snagged  the  automated  slips  and  lifted 
them out of the table, so it was decided to use manual slips.   

 

Figure 1 

 

 

 

 

   Figure 2 

 

The  IP’s  tasks  were  to  set  and  remove  slips,  and  ensure  the  elevator  cable  was  clear  of  the  pipe  when 
pulling to the next tool joint.  Fig. 1 above shows how the elevator cable can easily snag the slip handles.  
This  possibility  should  have  been  identified  with  risk  mitigated  by  relocating  the  cable  to  ensure  it  did  not 
interfere  with  the  slip  handles.  Fig  2  indicates  the  IP’s  position  with  his  back  to  the  rotary  table  and 
preoccupied with the elevator cable.  The IP was not aware of impending hazard.  

Six  hours  of  repetitive  work  contributed  to  diminished  crew  safety  awareness  without  supervisors  calling  a 
step-back to review procedures and associated risks.    

Although a tool box talk had been conducted, there was no formal risk assessment as prescribed by JSA and 
PTW.  

  JSA risk considerations include: 

•  Snagging hazard from cables; not only on slips. 
•  Cables also presented trip hazard. 
•  Slips freestanding around a busy work space (rotary table) in this operation are vulnerable. 
•  Complacency  due  to  repetitive  tasks call  for  extra  effort  to  be  on  alert  to  hazards  and  tendency  to 

take risks.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the 
following: 

Focus on  Behavioral  Modification by  use  of  PTW,  JSA,  and  Basic  Safety  Tools.   JSA,  reviewed  at pre-job 
meetings  should  be  modified  as  necessary  in  the  event  of  change,  and  reviewed  by  relieving  crews.    All 
personnel should be fluent in the language and process of risk assessment.   

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

Supervisors need to regularly offer input to their crews and draw them into the task process or job.  This is 
often needed to draw attention to complacency and tendency to overlook hazards and take risks.   Effective 
Supervision does not happen by merely maintaining a presence.  Supervisors should constantly ensure that 
their personnel and areas are safe by monitoring closely, offering support, and intervening when necessary. 
It  is  not  enough  just  to  criticize  when  something  looks  or  goes  wrong  but  solutions  must  be  offered  and 
corrective measures taken.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2006 

