Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 48 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

LACK OF STAIRWAY LIGHTING RESULTS IN FALL 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
At 5:05 a.m. the employee was going from the top deck of the platform to the well bay.  As he was walking 
down the steps to the well bay he slipped on one of the steps fell backward and struck the back of his neck 
on one of the upper steps.  The platform was unmanned, so there was no lighting on the platform aside from 
the corner beacon lights. 

•  There was no lighting on the platform. 
•  The employee did not bring a flashlight so he could better see where he was going. 
•  The employee lost his footing while descending the stairs. 
•  The lighting from the sub-structure of the rig did not light up the lower decks of the platform. 
•  The Job Safety Analysis did not include the lighting hazard. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
• 
• 
• 

The Job Safety Analysis was revised to include the hazard of inadequate lighting on the platform.   
Portable lights were rigged up at the top of the stairway. 
The company’s policies on stairway safety and proper use of handrails were discussed at the pre-

tour safety meetings for both crews.  

Instructed operations personnel that prior to performing any work on a new location Rig Supervisors must 
ensure that adequate lighting is provided everywhere employees are working as well as stairs and 
passageways. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2004 

