Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 15  
 

MAKING UP BIT INTO BIT SUB RESULTS IN 

HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The floor crew was in process of making up bit, bit sub, and first 6-1/4" drill collar.  When drill collar was in V-
door, the lift sub was installed, tightened with the chain tong and hammered up.  The collar was then picked up 
and set in the bit sub.  The pipe spinner shouldered up the collar onto the sub, but would not shoulder up the 
sub to bit.  The floor crew installed the rotary tongs and started making up the bit, the driller was watching his 
torque gauge during this process.  When the connections were made up, the driller raised the blocks to pick up 
the  collar,  sub,  and  bit.    At  this  point  the  lifting  sub  came  out  of  the  collar.    The  collar  then  fell  across  the 
driller's side landing then onto the mud pit causing damage to stairs. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Potential Root Causes:   
 
The floor crew was not watching the lifting sub during last part of process;  
Possible wear on threads, which prevented the lifting sub from being fully torqued.  
 
Contributing Factors:  
 
Both Floor hands were concentrating on making tongs bite properly; 
Driller was watching torque gage, which left no one watching the lifting sub; 
Elevators not being hobbled could have added friction on the lifting sub. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following action items: 
 
•  After hammering up the lifting sub is in the V-door, lower into mouse hole (well hole and set slips) and 

make up the lifting sub with rig tongs; 

•  Do not turn collar until person is watching the lifting sub; 
• 
 

Inspect collar box and lifting sub threads before using. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued April 2004 

