Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 04  

TRANSFER PUMPS (PRIMER CAP HAZARDS) 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A transfer pump on the reserve pit had stopped working.  The driller alerted a crewmember to shut down the 
pump  and  take  the  primer  cap  off  to  re-prime  the  pump  if  needed.    The  injured  person  (IP)  shut  off  the 
transfer pump and began to open the primer cap by loosening the bolts on the top cap.  Pressure from the 
pump  blew  the  cap  off  resulting  in  super-heated  mud  spraying  the  crewmember  in  the  face.    The  injury 
resulted in 3rd degree burns to the IP’s face and neck with permanent injuries. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
Transfer pumps that are bull plugged with no pressure relief valve pose a serious hazard that could result in 
serious injury or death.  There have been reports of serious struck-by and burn injuries in the drilling industry 
when attempting to remove the transfer pump’s primer cap while it is under pressure. 
 
  The discharge hose was buried only a few inches underground in a PVC pipe and routed across a path 

where trucks continuously drive.   

  The PVC pipe was crushed by a truck running over it which pinched off the discharge hose.   
  The  suction  hose  had  a  one  way  valve  allowing  fluid  in  but  not  back  out  (self-priming).    Once  the 
discharge  hose  was  pinched  off,  back  pressure  built  up  in  the  primer  reservoir  while  the  impellor 
continued to operate which superheated the mud.   

  The  ball  valve  located  at  the  bottom  of  the  reservoir  tank  which  could  have  been  used  to  release 

pressure, was plugged and the ball valve lever was removed.   

  The crew member began backing the bolts off of the primer plate when the plate blew off and sprayed 

super-heated mud onto his face and neck.     

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Corrective Action: The Company recommended the following corrective actions to prevent reoccurrence of 
this type of incident.  
 
 

Issued a notice to all rig supervisors that all crew members should be trained (mentored) on the proper 
operations and safety hazards for transfer pumps. 

  Rig  Supervisors  were  instructed  to  inform  each  new  crew  member  that  if  they  do  not  understand  the 
maintenance operations of priming the transfer pump, or have not been shown the proper steps to take 
to prime the pump, then (STOP) the process and ask for help.   
Instructed  rig  supervisors  to  ensure  that  all  transfer  pumps  have  a  working  ball  valve  (pressure  relief 
valve)  installed  on  the  reservoir  which  is  not  plugged  so  that  it  can  be  used  to  relieve  pressure  in  the 
pump.  

 

  Rig  personnel  were  instructed  to  conduct  two  separate  JSAs  on  opening  the  primer  cap  of  a  transfer 
pump that has a bull plug but no ball valve lever, and a transfer pump that is properly equipped with no 
bull plug and does have ball valve lever. 
o 

It is necessary to conduct both JSAs due to: 
  Crew members not knowing the normal routine tasks of proper shut down and maintenance on 

the transfer pump that is properly equipped.  

  Crew members not knowing the non-routine task of recognizing improperly modified equipment 
(i.e.,  bull  plug  and  no  ball  valve  lever)  and  what  the  necessary  steps  are  to  perform  the  task 
safely. 

  Rig personnel were instructed that proper Lock-Out /Tag-Out Procedures should be taken when working 

on or maintaining the transfer pump: 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

o  Shut the pump down (electrical power). 
o  Lock out the power source and tag out the power source (breaker and/ or lock out switch or button). 
o  Push  the  start  up  button  several  times  making  sure  that  any  residual  electrical  power  is  removed 

o  Release any pressure from the pump by slowly opening the valve located at the bottom of the pump 

from the pump.  

reservoir tank. 

  Rig personnel were instructed to NEVER attempt to remove the primer cap if the pressure relief valve is 

replaced with a bull plug (a approved JSA must be in place before releasing any internal pressure).  
o 

If  the  pressure  relief  valve  has  a  bull  plug  then  (STOP).    Do  not  attempt  to  open  the  primer  cap.  
Immediately  contact  your  driller,  pusher  and  company  man  for  further  evaluation  and  instructions 
(communicate with all three). 

 

 

Instructed rig personnel to NEVER remove the suction and discharge hoses without first releasing any 
built up pressure.  This can be done by slowly opening the pressure relief valve at the bottom of the tank 
reservoir. 
Instructed rig personnel  to NEVER attempt to readjust cam levers on the suction and discharge hoses 
while  the  pump  is  running  or  has  just  been  shut  down.  Always  shut  down  the  power  and  relieve  any 
pressure.   

  Rig  personnel  were  instructed  that  during  rig  up  procedures,  all  transfer  pumps  (including  3rd  party) 

should be visually inspected: 

Inspect all fittings and hoses. 

Inspect all electrical connections and electrical lines. 

Note:  power shall be locked out before inspecting transfer pumps. 
o 
o  Make sure the pressures valves used to relieve pressure do not have a bull plug in place. 
o  Make sure the pressure relief valve has a ball valve lever in place. 
o  Make sure the pressure relief valve is working correctly. 
o 
o  Make sure any moving parts (couplings) are adequately guarded. 
Instructed rig personnel to wear PPE including: 
o  Gloves 
o  Safety glasses 
o  Hard hat 
o  Eye goggles (when removing primer cap or hoses) 
o  Full face shield (when removing primer cap or hoses) 
o  Chemical rubber gloves, apron full face shield and goggles if mud is hot or high PH (caustic). 

 
SEE NEXT PAGE FOR PICTURES 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

Discharge Hose 

Suction Hose 

Figure 1 Transfer pump at reserve pit behind mud tanks. 

Bull Plug 

 

 

Figure 2  Primer Cap that was being removed. 

Figure 3  Relief valve on transfer pump with a bull plug in place 
(pressure cannot be relieved from valve). 

Figure 4  Follow Up Inspection 2 months later on same transfer 
pump  from  which  the  safety  alert  was  initiated  (see  next 
picture). 
 

 
Figure 5  After fleet wide distribution of the initial issuance of 
this safety alert, the pump was corrected by removing the bull 
plug and adding a new ball valve lever.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2011 

 

 

 

