Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 20  

DAMAGE TO STARBOARD FLARE BOOM 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Well testing operations were being conducted which required the installation of flare booms.  Eighty-five foot 
flare  booms  were  fitted  to  the  pre-existing  boom  turntables  of  the  port  and  starboard  wing  decks.    The 
starboard flare boom was fitted first, followed by the port flare boom.  Once the flare booms were installed 
additional heat suppression equipment was installed on both starboard and port flare booms.  
 
The starboard flare boom began rotating slightly on its longitudinal axis and was re-tensioned, which rectified 
the problem.  The starboard flare boom was left extended for approximately 64 hours before hydrocarbons 
were flared utilizing the starboard burner head for approximately 15 minutes.  
 
After approximately three hours crew members heard a bang from the starboard side of the rig and went to 
investigate.    As  a  crew  member  made  his  way  along  the  starboard  side  of  the  rig  he  noticed  that  the 
starboard flare boom burner head was submerged in the water, while the base was still attached to the wing 
deck with the king post lying almost horizontal above the boom.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The original rig flaring installation was altered and relocated from the aft of the rig to the mid-ship wing decks. 
The relocation of the flare booms required structural engineering of the wing decks and engineering of the 
king posts.  
 
A detailed incident investigation revealed that the failure of the starboard king post rear stay base plate was 
a result of two primary failure modes:  
 

 
 

Incorrect engineering.  
Incorrect welding specification.  

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Review the design criteria for attaching base plates to the deck structure with particular focus on the design 
principles  (including  welding)  with  regard  to  uniform  deck  loading  and  the  potential  for  hard  points  to  be 
created by under deck stiffening and the effect these can have on the deck loading. 

Review the calculations and loading on connecting pins associated with king post structures.  
 
Review  the  design criteria  for  attaching  base plates to  the  deck structure with particular  focus on  the weld 
design in regards to the possible effects of Lamellar Cracking relative to the thickness of the deck plate and 
base plate.  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
Starboard Boom Prior to Failure 

Starboard Boom After Failure 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2010 

