Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 03 

MAST RAISING LINE FAILURE 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During the rig move, the drilling rig mast was to be raised.  It was initially lifted 30 cm (12 inches) from its 
horizontal position  on  the  high  derrick stand  and  operations stopped  for  15  minutes with  the  mast  hoisting 
system under tension.  This was done to allow the crew to fit Blowout Preventer (BOP) lifting beams below 
the sub-structure.  Lifting operations then re-commenced pulling 220 tons, lifting a further 60 cm (2 feet).  A 
bang was heard and the mast fell back 90 cm (3 feet) uncontrolled, landing on and damaging the high derrick 
stand.  The monkey board and mast were also damaged.  .  No personnel injury but there was major asset 
damage. 
 

Picture 1 

 

Picture 2 

 

Picture 3 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
It was found that the short leg of the 2 1/4" diameter mast raising line had failed at the first sheave.  The mast 
had been raised 30 cm (12 inches) and left static with the failure weight 220 ton held on the brake.  No clear 
cause of the raising line failure could be established at the initial site visit.  Further metallurgical and 
dimensional checks need to be carried out by independent cable examination laboratories.  The line had 
exceeded its life span as set by the contractor, but not its number of cycles.  A step-out was generated for 
this, but not on sound engineering principles.   
 
Potential Severity:   
 
A  Level  4  (fatality)  potential  was  assigned  to  this  incident  from  the  fact  that  men  were  then  walking  in  the 
area  where  the  raising  line  whipped  during  failure.    Given  a  different  time  of  failure  one  or  two  men  could 
have been seriously injured or killed.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions: 
 

•  Change out your raising line on time.  Do not exceed the working life or cycles set by the company. 

Question the assumptions on which the change out is based. 

•  Ensure that all step-outs are based on sound engineering principles, not just to keep a unit in action. 
Do a reality check on the risk assessment in the step-out, what if this piece of equipment failed, what 
would the end result be, do not understate the results   

•  Understand the loads applied in the system and the safety factors applied. 
•  Under no circumstances allow anyone to walk or work under the mast or in the sub-structure area 

when the lifting of the mast is taking place.  If work needs to be done, find another way to do it.  

•  Refer to raising-line procedures in pre-job discussions, recognize loads quoted and question when 

these figures don’t match reality. 

 
IADC Note:  Refer to the IADC HSE Committee’s Safety Topic Book “Raising and Lowering the Mast”   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2007 

