Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 20  
 

MASTER BUSHINGS SET ON IP’S TOE - LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While flow checking the well, the Injured Person (IP) a Tourpusher, noticed that the drill pipe wiper rubber 
had  dropped  below  the  top  of  the  fixed  diverter.    In  order  to  retrieve  the  wiper  rubber,  the  rotary  master 
bushings  had  to  be  pulled.    The  bushings  were  pulled  with  the  aid  of  an  air  tugger  and  the  wiper  rubber 
retrieved.  In  order  to  reset  the  bushings  back  into  the  rotary  table  the  IP  proceeded  to  pull  them  toward 
himself with the assistance of a floorman who was pushing in the same direction.  The bushings obstructed 
the tugger operator’s (Assistant Driller) view of the IP’s feet and after the IP instructed the tugger operator to 
slack off, the IP’s foot slipped out from beneath him and over the rotary opening.  The tugger operator was 
unaware  of  the  IP’s  foot  position  and  the  bushings  were  set  down  on  top  of  the  IP’s  left  foot  causing  a 
fracture  of  his  big  toe.    At  the  time  of  this  incident  the  driller,  pumpman  and  two  floormen  were  eating 
breakfast in the galley.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Causal Factors:   
•  Lack of awareness regarding the excess mud and slip potential 
• 
Incorrect foot placement and not using the non-skid rotary mat 
•  Failure to consider and remove excess drilling fluid around the table 
•  No JRA was ever written for master bushing handling 
•  Possible self imposed time pressure to complete this task quickly 
• 
•  Possible end of tour fatigue / complacency 
Inadequate number of personnel for the job 
• 
• 
IP’s feet not in tugger operator’s line of sight 
•  Pulling bushings rather that pushing (body position) 
Root Cause: 
•  Failure to conduct formal risk assessment (JRA) 
•  Lack of proper supervision 
•  Failure to call Time Out 
•  The unplanned event of having to pull the bushings combined with three absent regular crewmembers 

Insufficient personnel available to safely accomplish the task 

involved change. This change was not considered, discussed nor managed. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
OIM/PIC (Toolpusher) to review at the next Crew Weekly Safety/Environmental meeting.  Rig Safety / 
Environmental Committee to communicate to all crew members.  Post a copy of this bulletin on the 
Rig Information Center Board. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

Position of Bushings Prior to Incident 
 

 

Position of Injured Person’s Foot 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2005 

