Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 26 
 

SAFE HELICOPTER OPERATIONS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  recent  high  potential  incident  occurred  on  an  offshore  rig  during  a  normal  crew  change  which  was  the 
result of a number of procedural and behavioral failures.  A helicopter was on deck and the passengers and 
cargo  were  offloaded  without  incident.    The  HLO  requested  and  received  permission  to  load  some  of  the 
manifested baggage and cargo  inside the  helicopter  as  the  baggage area was  insufficient.    Once  this was 
accomplished the HLO commenced the boarding of the inbound passengers.  The manifest listed eight (8) 
passengers.  The pilot noticed movement of the port crane boom as the Crane Operator attempted to make 
a lift from a supply boat alongside.  The pilot notified the HLO of this and the HLO left the helideck to shut 
down and secure the crane.  After the Crane was shut down the HLO returned to the helideck and noted that 
all the doors of the helicopter had been secured.  Following a survey of the surrounding area the HLO gave 
the clearance signal for the helicopter to take off.  The return flight to shore was completed uneventfully and 
as the pilot prepared to give the approval for the disembarkation of the passengers, he noticed that one of 
the passengers had some of the baggage on his lap secured by a seat belt.  After making a head count the 
pilot  discovered  that  he  had  a  head  count  of  ten  (10)  passengers  and  not  the  eight  (8)  as  originally 
manifested.  The pilot ordered a cross check of the manifest and requested that all passengers and cargo be 
weighed.    It  was  determined  that  the  helicopter  had  made  the  return  flight  with  approximately  308kg  or 
approximately 690 pounds of weight in excess of the aircrafts maximum allowable limits. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Unauthorized operation of the crane created a distraction for the HLO and was a violation of company 

policies.   

•  The employee assigned as Dispatcher to manage the helicopter lounge during arrival and departure was 
going  in  earlier  than  originally  scheduled  and  arranged  for  himself  to  depart  on  the  same  flight  as  his 
outbound relief.  In addition he was the first and not the last to board the helicopter.  A breakdown in the 
company’s Management of Change procedures.   

•  Restrictions were not in place to limit access to the helicopter lounge area and this added to the boarding 
confusion allowing two service employees to don survival suits unsupervised and with their own baggage 
join the boarding.  Poor planning, lack of effective organizational controls and absence of established rig 
specific procedures.   

•  The rig operated on an “honor system” allowing passengers to weigh themselves and provide their own 
personal and baggage weights for listing on the manifest without any verification.  It was determined that 
weights provided were not accurate, which is a violation of another HSE Policy.   

•  Lack of an established process to allow a timely and proper communication of an arriving helicopter with 

rig personnel and shore-bound passengers.   

•  There  was  poor supervision  throughout  the  incident  from  the Crane  Operator  to  the  assumption  of  the 

HLO that because the doors were secured all was in order.  

•  Prior  to  clearance  and  lift  off  and  throughout  the  returning  flight,  the  opportunity  existed  for  any 
passenger to call time out and alert the pilot that a passenger was seated with cargo on his lap and a 
seat  belt  in  place  over  the  cargo.    An  obvious  at  risk  behavior  which  was  not  acted  upon  and 
summarized the risk tolerance level of all other passengers on that flight. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company instructed the rig supervisors in the 
following: 
 
The  transportation  of  personnel  to  and  from  offshore  installations  by  helicopter  is  a  common  and  routine 
practice in the drilling industry.  We manage our safety by planning our work, communicating effectively 
and following all the established procedures.  Risk Assessment and risk mitigation must be properly 
applied in and around helicopters just as it is done when performing any other job that has inherent risk and 
a  high  severity  potential.    While  the  pilot  as  the  commander  of  the  helicopter  is  ultimately  responsible  and 
accountable for helicopter safety, our company has onboard procedures that have been developed and 
implemented to mitigate all known risks to an acceptable level of management.  All Company employees 
involved  in  the  arrival,  loading,  unloading  and  departure  of  a  helicopter  at  one  of  our  rigs  site  must  also 
understand  and  fulfill  their  designated  roles  /  duties  to  ensure  that  the  process  is  safely  administered.    All 
passengers  traveling  on  a  helicopter  have  the  same  responsibility  to  comply  fully  with  established 
requirements.    Helicopter  operations  while  considered  routine  are  by  definition  a  safety  critical 
operation.   
 
It is important to discuss these events and share the “lessons learned”.   
 
•  Review your rig specific helicopter loading and unloading procedure to ensure that this incident 

•  Make  sure  this  safety  critical  operation  is  well  planned  and  proper  controls  are  in  place  to  ensure 

•  Review  the  policy  guidelines  in  the  company  HSE  manual  and  include  area  specific  regulatory 

•  Critique operations for signs of weakness or noncompliance and if any are identified, implement action to 

could not occur on your rig.   

flawless execution of the plan.   

requirements.   

correct them.  

•  The rig in question has now developed and implemented a rig specific helicopter operations procedure.   
 
In  this  particular  incident  we  left  safety  to  chance  and  were  extremely  fortunate  with  the  outcome. 
Please do your part to help ensure that this type of incident is not allowed to occur again. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2005 

