 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 09 

 

HIGH POTENTIAL INCIDENT– STRUCK BY DROPPED OBJECT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
As  part  of  the  plough  recovery  sequence  and  whilst  spooling  a  200  meter  (656  feet)  pennant  onto  the  storage  pocket  of  an  anchor 
handling winch, a chain guide, weighing 21 kilograms (46 pounds), and two sheared securing bolts dropped a distance of approximately 
2 meters (6.5 feet) from the starboard chain motor area.   The chain guide struck a member of the deck crew on the brim of his hard hat 
knocking it off.  The chain guard then fell onto his chest causing superficial injuries and ultimately landed, with the sheared bolts, on the 
vessel deck.  Using the Drops Calculator as a benchmark in the classification of the potential consequences of a dropped object, the 
outcome of this incident could have resulted in a fatality. 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

The initial investigation found that one bolt appeared to have fractured; this had the potential to cause misalignment of the chain 
guide during normal operations. This misalignment appears to have resulted in the chain guide to catch on the chain, resulting in 
the shearing of the second bolt and fall to the deck. 
The injured party should not have been in the area during this operation. 

 

• 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

 

The company reminded all employees that effective toolbox talks, supervision and an on-going review of working practices are 
essential to ensure lessons learned are identified and acted upon. 

•  All employees were instructed to ensure that their worksite is made secure. 
•  All employees were reminded to exercise a “Time Out For Safety” with all persons on-board when in doubt. 
• 

The company required their maintenance staff to ensure that all securing bolts are checked within the winch house area across the 
fleet. 
The company required all managers to hold a “Time Out For Safety” session to discuss this safety notice. 
The company reminded all managers that planning and procedural control of tasks should consider the position of personnel and 
the potential dangers as part of their procedure development. 
The company required all personnel to remain clear of hazardous areas and equipment. 

• 
•  All managers were instructed to ensure access points to all hazardous areas and equipment have adequate barriers and signage. 

• 
• 

Credit to: Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 14-01 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect the position of 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

their own situations and practices Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

Issued March 2014 

