Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT - SATELLITE DOME 

 
ALERT 07 – 18 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

 

Contributing Factors 

It  was  necessary  to  move  the  satellite  dome  on  a  Mobile  Offshore  rig.    A  set  of  nylon  straps  was  used  to 
remove  a  telephone  satellite  dome  from  the  aft  location  to  the  bow.    When  it  was  to  be  landed  on  the 
pilothouse the shackles would not allow it to sit properly.  It was put on boards and the shackles were taken 
off.  The crews rigged up a 2” nylon ratchet strap that was run through the eyes of the nylon slings around the 
base  of  the  dome.    The  dome  was  picked  up  4”  and  everything  was  checked  to  make  sure  the  load  was 
distributed  evenly.    The  dome  was  picked  up  4  feet  and  stopped  to  remove  a  shackle  that  was  not  initially 
removed; the dome fell to the deck causing severe damage to the dome. 

The 2” nylon ratchet handle was not properly closed, therefore not being positively locked. 

♦  No JSA or risk assessment for that specific job was done. 

♦  There was no procedure from the manufacturer on how to handle the dome. 

♦  Mounting brackets were of two different patterns. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

1.  Procure proper manufacturer procedures and lifting devices.  Manufacturer makes a lifting device, but the 

2.  All  rigs  must  review  their  procedures  for  handling  the  satellite  dome  and  ensure  proper  handling 

wrong one was sent. 

procedures. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2007 

