Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 02 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – PAD EYES FAIL CAUSING NEAR MISS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
When lifting a newly constructed mud cleaning equipment skid for installation on a mud tank, three of the four 
lifting lug pad eyes failed at the welds located on the top of the Mud Cleaning System Lifting Frame.  The skid 
fell  to  the  ground.    The  shaker  skid  was  approximately  two  feet  off  the  ground  when  the  welds  failed.  
Fortunately, the crew members were using tag lines on the equipment and were at a safe distance from the 
lift.  No injuries sustained and no equipment damaged. 

 

 
 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 
•  Lack of quality control during fabrication permitted a substandard product to enter into service. 
•  Weld penetration on the pad eyes was found to be unacceptable by standard welding specifications. 
•  After construction of the skid, inspection of the welds was not thorough nor complete. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 

Instructed construction supervisors that all pad eyes used for lifting purposes need to be stamped with a 
unique  identity  mark  or  number  to  enable  tracing  of  the  pad  eye  to  the  inspection  and  certification 
documents. 

•  Personnel  in  charge  of  reconstruction  or  construction  of  skids  were  instructed  to  contract  a  third  party 
qualified welding inspector to visually inspect and verify that all welding of lifting lugs and pad eyes meet 
the quality standards for welding. 

•  The  company  revised  engineering  and  drafting  procedures  for  drawings  to  include  the  wording  that  all 
critical welds on lifting lugs and base plates as well as other critical welds associated with lift and support 
structures be inspected by a qualified welding inspector for cracks, fatigue, penetration, etc. 

•  The company instructed quality control personnel that the Quality Control System needs to be improved 

and closely monitored. 

•  The  company  instructed  company  personnel  in  charge  of  rig  construction  projects  to  develop  a  Lifting 
Equipment  Register  and  use  it  to  log  all  pad  eyes  on  the  rig  as  they  are  welded,  inspected  and 
documented prior to leaving the rig up facility. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2009 

