Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 30 
 

HIGH POTENTIAL INCIDENTS INVOLVING SINGLE JOINT / PICK UP 

ELEVATORS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Over the past few weeks we have experienced two separate incidents within our fleet that involved dropping joints of 
tubulars simply because the wrong size and type elevators were used.  While neither of these incidents resulted in any 
form of injury the emerging trend is disturbing and requires immediate corrective action.  The following represents a 
summary of the High Potential Near Miss incidents where we have dropped tubulars when using single joint / pick up 
elevators.  
 
Incidents:  
 
While picking up 3-1/2” (Hydril PH6) tubing and running in the hole with single joint elevators a joint came free and 
fell  approximately  10  feet  into  the  mousehole.    The  elevators  remained  closed  with  the  pin  secured.    Closer 
investigation revealed that the elevators which were supplied by a third party on behalf of the customer were dressed 
with Blohm & Voss inserts and hard stamped 3-1/2” machined to order at 12 degrees.  Following a measurement of the 
inside  diameter  of  the  elevators  it  was  established  that  the  actual  ID  was  4”,  almost  3/8”  too  large  resulting  in  only 
minimal contact with the upset of the tubing.  
 
In a separate incident while rigging up and running a 4-1/2” liner, the shoe joint was picked up vertically using pick up 
elevators and lowered through the rotary table. The joint was filled with mud and was in the process of being raised to 
check that the shoe was clear when the joint slipped through the elevators and dropped into the well.  The shoe joint 
was the only joint with the collared VAM ace connection, the remaining liner was the Hydril 521 thread with a slick 
profile.  Once again the handling tools were supplied by a third party on behalf of the client and in this case the pick up 
elevators supplied were 5”.  The pick up elevators were clearly stamped 5” and rated for 1000 pounds.  In addition to 
the pick up elevators the third party had supplied two sets YC elevators rated at 75 tons.  The rig actually performed an 
equipment inspection and noted that one of these sets was incorrectly dressed with a 4” die profile while the other was 
correctly dressed.  The reason that the crew decided to handle the shoe joint using the pick up elevators while there 
was a correctly dressed set of side door elevators readily available is still under investigation.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
These two incidents highlight the need to implement a thorough risk assessment process for this type of activity which 
should  include  not  just  the  inspection  and  tallying  but  the  physical  measuring  of  the  dimensions  of  the  handling 
equipment supplied. The stamping of equipment can no longer be taken as a guarantee that the material is that 
actual size. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to rig 
personnel: 
 
For  the  purpose  of  establishing  that  we  have  the  correct  tools  for  the  job,  the  risk  assessment  also  needs  to  clearly 
identify what type of elevators should be used for the activity? i.e.  Do we use pick up elevators to run tools through the 
rotary table?  What is the process for inspecting the equipment supplied?  How are we checking this equipment?  Who 
is responsible for the checking and when was this accomplished?  Please discuss both these incidents onboard your rig.  
We  were  very  fortunate  in  both  incidents  that  nobody  was  injured.    Review  Company  HSET  Bulletin  previously 
distributed on April 15, 2004 which reflects the ultimate penalty for not getting this right; a fatality.  Please use this 
bulletin to reinforce the message to share and implement the lessons learned.  If we don’t get it right the first time, we 
may not always be lucky enough to have another chance. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2005 

