Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 23 

LIFEBOAT INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 

BACKGROUND: 
 
Offshore  rigs  or  Mobile  Offshore  Drilling  Units  (MODU)  are  normally  outfitted  with  lifeboats  as  a  means  of 
emergency evacuation.  Since the lifeboats are lifesaving equipment, they must be maintained in a “ready to 
go”  condition  AT  ALL  TIMES.    Regular  drills  along  with  and  testing  of  lifeboats  &  equipment  is  generally 
required  by  regulation  and  has  been  the  industry-accepted  means  of  assuring  readiness  of  the  lifeboats.  
Accident statistics indicate that most accidents involving lifeboats occur during drills and other maintenance 
activities. 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A MODU launched its starboard lifeboat with a crew of seven as part of a planned drill.  At the conclusion of 
the drill, while recovering the lifeboat, the aft hook opened inadvertently as the life-boat was hoisted close to 
its stowed position. The lifeboat swung onto its forward hook, with the sequential failure of that davit line also, 
resulting in the lifeboat and its occupants free falling approximately 65 feet into the sea.  This resulted in the 
tragic loss of life of one crew member and in addition the six other crew members suffered various degrees 
of injury. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Investigations  revealed  that  the  “On-Load”  release  system  of  the  lifeboat  had  malfunctioned  due  to 
deterioration  of  some  critical  components  of  the  system  with  age  and  use.    The  rig  crew  did  not  fully 
understand  the  way  the  lifeboat  release  system  worked  in  order  to  conduct  adequate  checks  of  its 
mechanism  and  assure  its  integrity  prior  to  hoisting  the  lifeboat  back  up  to  the  rig.    Some  of  the  planned 
maintenance for the lifeboat and its release mechanism had not been implemented partially due to confusion 
on  the  rig  between  preventive  maintenance,  marine  certification  and  flag  state  regulatory  requirements.    A 
long  history  and  a  lot  of  information  exists  within  the  shipping  and  ship  owner’s  domain  about  lifeboat 
accidents  due  to  “On-Load”  release  system  malfunction.    This  information  had  somehow  not  been  fully 
shared with the Drilling Contractor community. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Company Rig Managers are to immediately plan for an OEM engineer to visit all MODUs to assess the 
lifeboat release systems and conduct annual and 5-yearly inspection/overhaul/testing of the lifeboats and 
their release systems (if this inspection/overhaul has not been conducted and documented in the last six 
months).  

  Company  Maintenance  Supervisors  are  to  enforce  prompt  and  timely  implementation  of  approved 

maintenance tasks and procedures. 

  Upon  completion  of  the  above  inspection/overhaul,  company  Rig  Managers  are  to  have  the  OEM 
representative  fully  explain  the  operation  of  each  lifeboat  release  system  and  its  mechanism  to 
respective rig crews and ensure the latest version of the operating manual is present on the MODU.  

  Each  MODU  manager  (Rig  Manager)  is  to  conduct  and  document  a  formal  Risk  Assessment  exercise 

before conducting any lifeboat drills in future.   

  Each  MODU  manager  (Rig  Manager)  is  to  update  preventive  maintenance  tasks  and  procedures  to 

include the latest IMO/SOLAS regulations for lifeboats and other life saving equipment. 

  Company  management  is  to  establish  contacts  with  IMO/SOLAS,  the  IADC  and  the  lifeboat  OEM  to 
permit  knowledge  sharing  regarding  marine  safety  regulations,  updates  to  current  regulations,  alerts 
involving lifeboats and any equipment changes and/or modifications.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

In the light of this and many other serious incidents involving lifeboats, company personnel are to assess 
whether it may be better to move to a safer means of evacuation in the event of an emergency. 

 
IADC Note See IMO Documents: IMO MSC.1/Circ.1206/Rev.1 11 June 2009 MEASURES TO PREVENT 
ACCIDENTS WITH LIFEBOATS found at  
http://www.imo.org/includes/blastDataOnly.asp/data_id%3D25943/1206-Rev-1.pdf  
INTERIM RECOMMENDATION ON CONDITIONS FOR AUTHORIZATION OF SERVICE PROVIDERS FOR 
LIFEBOATS, LAUNCHING APPLIANCES AND ON-LOAD RELEASE GEAR 
  http://www.imo.org/includes/blastDataOnly.asp/data_id%3D22233/1277.pdf  
GUIDELINES FOR THE FITTING AND USE OF FALL PREVENTER DEVICES (FPDs) 
  http://www.imo.org/includes/blastDataOnly.asp/data_id%3D25970/1327.pdf 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2009 

