Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

LANYARD CAUGHT IN KELLY RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 

ALERT 04 – 04 
 

 
 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Full body harness and attachments 

 

 

 

COULD THIS HAPPEN TO YOU? 

A  rig  worker  was  fatally  injured  after  his  6-foot  lanyard  was  wrapped  around  the 
Kelly bar.  The daylight crew were in the process of drilling surface hole.  A cable
used  during  slip  and  cut  operations  had  become  unsecured  and  was  hanging
inside the derrick.  The Motorman volunteered to secure the cable to the derrick
girt.  The  worker  was  wearing  a  full  body  harness  with  a  6-foot  rope  lanyard 
attached to his shock absorber.  
 
The Driller, standing at the driller controls, watched the worker complete the task.
The rotary table was slowed down as the worker was positioned at the girt.  Once
the  worker  completed  the  task  the  Driller  resumed  rotating  at  130  RPM.    As  the
worker  climbed  down  the  derrick  ladder  the  Driller  walked  across  the  floor  to
adjust his weight indicator. The Motorman walked across the rig floor over toward
the Driller positioned at the weight indicator (mud tank side of floor or off-driller’s 
side).  The Driller heard the Motorman speak and turned toward the rotary table.
The Motorman stood on the corner of the rotary table (mud tank side), his lanyard
wrapped around the Kelly bar (Kelly rotating 130 RPM).  The lanyard was floating
around  the  Kelly  bar  but  did  not  grab.    The  Driller  immediately  ran  to  the  driller 
console,  the  inertia  brake  was  engaged  and  both  clutches  for  the  drawworks
kicked  out.    The  Driller  witnessed  the  lanyard  tighten  to  the  Kelly  bar  and  the
Motorman pulled into the bushing.   

   

The rotary table was turning at approximately 130 RPM 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig supervisors and 
personnel in the following: 
 
• 

Identify and enforce clear standards associated to working around rotating table.  To assist this process complete an 
individual hazard assessment clearly identifying danger zone (distance) and compliance measures. 
Identify and enforce clear standards associated to use of fall protection equipment in and around rotating equipment. 
• 
•  Work with fall protection training agencies to ensure that procedures for wearing fall protection address hazards 

associated to moving equipment.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily 

reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2004 

