Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 15 

LIFEBOAT PROPERTY DAMAGE INCIDENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  offshore  rig  recently  experienced  a  property  damage  incident  when  a  lifeboat  davit  component  failed 
while performing a scheduled weight test of a lifeboat.  Water bags were used to apply necessary weight to 
achieve maximum lifeboat capacity for the function test of release gear and davit components.  As required 
by procedure, all personnel involved with the job remained onboard the rig and in a position of safety, limiting 
the actual severity of this incident to property damage.  The lifeboat and davit arrangement consisted of two 
release hooks on the lifeboat supported by two davit fall/wires.  When test weight was achieved, the brake 
was  released  at  the  davit  to  initiate  a  controlled  descent  of  the  lifeboat.    The  brake  was  set  to  stop  the 
descent  of  the  lifeboat  approximately  6  feet  above  the  water  to  check  distance.    The  brake  was  again 
released  to  continue  lowering  the  lifeboat  and  after  descending  another  6  inches,  the  threads  of  a  sheave 
tensioning bolt used to adjust the sheave and secure it to the davit structure stripped.  The bolt thread failure 
allowed the sheave to detach/separate from the davit structure creating 20 foot of slack in the bow fall wire.  
The slack wire allowed the bow of the lifeboat to drop into the water and the weight/force was transferred to 
the supporting fall/wire at the stern.  This incident caused severe damage to the stern lifeboat deck area. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Equipment Failure:    Lifeboat  arrangements with  two  davit  falls/wires  and  two  hooks all  have  an  adjusting 
sheave  located  at  the  top  of  the  davit  to  allow  adjustment  so  the  lifeboat  will  fit  securely  against  the  davit 
bumper.  Photos attached to this bulletin page 2 of 2.  The first photo shows an open type adjusting sheave 
and the second photo shows an adjusting sheave enclosed in a capture or preventer box. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Immediate Action:   
  Lifeboat  davit  arrangements  that  consist  of  two  fall/wires  used  to  support  lifeboats  equipped  with  two 
hooks/release  gear  mechanisms  (bow  &  stern)  shall  not  be  lowered  or  hoisted  during  training 
exercises/drills  with  people  in  the  lifeboats  and  this  precautionary  measure  is  effective 
immediately 
If maintenance or servicing of the lifeboat is required, maintenance wires must be attached and removed 
when work is completed. 

 

  Weight tests of lifeboats and davits should be postponed until this issue is resolved. 
  This action does not apply to single fall/single release hook capsule type lifeboat arrangements. 
  This is a temporary precaution until we are able to implement corrective action for lifeboat davits of this 

type. 

  This  action  only  applies  to  training/exercises/drills  and  shall  not  prohibit  them  from  being  used  if 

emergency abandonment of the rig and abandonment by lifeboat is required. 

 
Engineering Actions: 
 
  Open type adjusting sheaves will be fitted with capture/preventer housing. 
  Tensioning bolts and nuts shall be compatible and made of carbon steel, not stainless steel. 
  Preventative Maintenance will be implemented to require inspection for corrosion or other damage. 
  A standard sheave tensioning bolt/nut arrangement. 
 
Note:  Review IADC ALERT 09 – 23 LIFEBOAT INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATALITY at:  
http://www.iadc.org/alerts.htm Also review the IADC letter regarding lifeboat safety that can be found at:  
http://www.iadc.org/committees/offshore/index.html  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

View of open type adjusting sheave without housing that 
will not catch/hold sheave in the event of failure. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

View of adjusting sheave with housing designed to 
catch/hold sheave in the event failure.  Engineering will 
assist Operations with upgrading open sheaves to this 
enclosed type. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2010 

