Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 39 
 

PIPE LAY DOWN OPERATION RESULTS IN BROKEN LEG 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
To  aid  in  laying  down  drill  pipe,  a  Third  Party  Contractor  was  contracted  and  two  employees  were  on  the 
ground  working  the  pipe  baskets.    The  first  basket  was  filled  with  drill  pipe  and  the  Third  Party  Contractor 
employees were in the process of removing the roller pipes out of the first tub to the second tub, when a joint 
of  drill  pipe  rolled  down  the  roller  pipe  and  into  the  pipe  basket.  The  joint  of  drill  pipe  hit  the  employee  and 
broke his leg. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The crew did not stop the lay down operation to allow for this task to be completed.  The crew also did not 
ensure  that  the  employees  were  clear  from  the  basket  before  resuming  operations.    This  was  the  injured 
employee’s first day on the job.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig site supervisors to do 
the following: 
 
•  Ensure  that  pre-job  safety  meetings  include  all  new  employees  who  will  be  involved  in  the  operation.  

Include instructions regarding where they will be working (position in relation to the job).  

•  Modify the JSA to include stopping the lay down operation to perform the task of removing the roller pipes 

•  Ensure that there is an observer (signalman) to notify the driller when the pipe baskets are clear and the 

from the pipe baskets.  

operations can be resumed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:  See IADC Accident Prevention Reference Guide Sections 1.4 Job Safety Analysis and 1.8  New 
Employee/Visitor Indoctrination.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2003 

