Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 11  
 

FAILURE TO PROPERLY MAKE UP THE TOP DRIVE/SAVER SUB 

CONNECTION RESULTS IN EMPLOYEE INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After making up the Bottom Hole Assembly to spud in the well, the crew made up the first stand of drill pipe 
in  the  mouse-hole.    The  stand  was  then  picked  up,  made  up  to  the  drill  string  and  then  the  top  drive  was 
connected.  As the drill string was picked up off the slips, the pumps were engaged to test the MWD tool.  At 
this point the drill string pulled loose from the top drive saver sub and dropped approximately 3 feet (91cm) 
into the elevators.  As the drill string dropped, the drill pipe screen came out of the top of the drill pipe and fell 
approximately  90  feet  (27m)  to  the  rig  floor  striking  an  employee  in  the  left  forearm,  which  resulted  in  a 
fracture. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The drill pipe  was not fully screwed into the saver sub because the top drive pipe grabber did not fully 

open allowing the drill pipe to stab into the saver sub. 

2.  While rotating the top drive, two grabber dies broke off and became wedged between the saver sub and 
drill pipe, thereby tightening it up and giving a false indication that the saver sub and drill pipe were made 
up. 

3.  The connection appeared to torque up.  
4.  The Driller did not engage the pumps and pressure up prior to picking up off the slips. 
5.  The grabber control switch failed when placed back to the “open position”.  
6.  The employees did not recognize the hazard prior to the top drive leaving the floor level.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  The Rig Manager had the counter balance valve for the pipe grabber replaced. 
2.  Rig crews operating top drives were instructed to revise the rig specific JSA / Work Plan to address the 

following when preparing to make a connection: 

a.  When applying pipe dope to the box and saver sub, the grabber is to be inspected to make 

sure that it is in the full open position, prior to raising the top drive leaving the floor level. 

b.  Deficiencies are to be immediately relayed to the Driller and Rig Manager; with appropriate 

maintenance / repairs scheduled and performed. 

3.  The  Driller  was  reminded  that  once  a  connection  is  made  and  torqued,  the  mud  pumps  are  to  be 
engaged  and  pressured  up  prior  to  picking  up  off  the  slips.    The  Driller  was  also  given  the  following 
instructions: 

a.  The top drive shall not be moved if leaks are noted; the Rig Manager shall be immediately 

notified. 

b.  The Rig Manager must agree to a variance if down hole conditions require that the pipe be 

picked up before the mud pumps pressure up.  

4.  Rig crews were reminded to review their rig specific JSA / Work Plan to make sure the minimum steps of 
making  up  joints  of  pipe  and/or  connecting  the  top  drive  are  taken  into  consideration.    Note:  The 
company  also  reminded  all  rig  crews  that  this  procedure  can  be  attached  to  the  JSA  /  Work  Plan  for 
review prior to making up a connection with the top drive. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2013 

