Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 15  
 

IMPROPER BODY POSITION RESULTS IN INJURY TO MOUTH 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  incident  occurred  when  a  coiled-tubing  contractor  employee  was  tightening  a  break-over  (lever-style) 
chain binder (boomer) on an injector head.  The employee’s hand slipped off the binder handle and it struck 
him in the chin.  The injured employee suffered seven chipped or cracked teeth.  The injured employee was 
taken to a dentist for treatment of the injury.  Although this injury was relatively minor, people have broken 
bones, lost eyesight and even been killed when struck by break-over binders. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Worker used a break-over binder instead of a ratchet binder. 
  Worker positioned self in the “line of fire” of the binder handle such that when his he lost his grip on the 

handle it him in the face.    

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  All  employees  were  reminded  that  pre-Job  safety  analyses  and  discussions  should  continue  to  be 

standard operating procedure when performing job tasks. 

  Workers  were  instructed  to  exercise  their  right  to  “Stop  Work  Authority”  and  ask  their  supervisor  for 
guidance  if  they  feel  that  something  is  unsafe.    Workers  not  only  have  the  right  but  they  have  the 
responsibility to bring unsafe conditions and potential unsafe actions to their supervisor’s attention so he 
can address them before doing the work. 

  Workers  were  reminded  to  use  ratchet-style  binders  for  tightening  chains  to  restrain  loads  and  that 
break-over binders shall not be used.  All break-over binders should be removed from the workplace so 
they cannot be used inadvertently by uninformed workers.  All worksites should have spare ratchet-style 
binders available in case a vendor arrives onsite without the proper binder so that break-over binders are 
not inadvertently used.  

  Supervisors  were  instructed  to  notify  vendors  of  the  prohibition  of  the  use  of  break-over  binders  on 

worksite locations. 

  Work  orders  and  contracts  require  that  contractors  not  use  break-over  style  binders.    Send  a  written 
notice to existing contractors that no loads are to arrive at the worksite using break-over binders to hold 
down loads. 

  Workers were reminded that break-over binder manufacturing companies recommend against the use of 

cheater pipes when either closing or opening lever binders. 

  Supervisors  were  instructed  to  disseminate  this  Safety  Alert  to  truck  drivers,  riggers,  coiled-tubing 
contractors and other workers who may handle binders or restrain loads so that they are aware of their 
“Stop Work Authority” and the prohibition of use of break-over binders. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2012 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2012 

