Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 03  
 

MALFUNCTIONING PUMP RESULTS IN  

3RD DEGREE BURN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  disconnecting  the  suction  line  from  a  drilling  fluid  transfer  pump,  an  employee  sustained  3rd  degree 
burns when his lower abdomen and right arm were splashed with hot drilling fluid.  The employee was in the 
process  of  transferring  the  hot  drilling  fluid  from  the  haul-off  pit  to  the  reserve  pit.    The  transfer  pump  had 
been running for an unknown amount of time before the employee discovered the suction line was clogged.  
The crew had experienced similar problems with the pump system in the past and was unsuccessful in their 
attempts  to  keep  the  suction  line  from  clogging  up.    The  employee  turned  the  pump  off  and,  with  the 
assistance of the derrickman who was lifting the suction line from the haul-off pit with a forklift, the employee 
attempted  to  disconnect  the  suction  line  from  the  pump.    Once  the  cam-lock  connector  on  the  pump  was 
released, the built up pressure in the suction line blew the hose off the pump, splashing the employee with 
the hot drilling fluid.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Once the suction line became clogged, the pump continued to run causing the system to operate at 

an unsafe temperature, building pressure between the end of the suction line and the pump. 

  The crew had experienced problem with the system from the time it was delivered on location and 
was not able to keep the suction line from clogging up.  The pump was not operating at its expected 
potential. 

  The  injured  employee  did  not  release  the  pressure  utilizing  the  pressure  bleed-off  valve  prior  to 

disconnecting the suction from the pump. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig personnel to immediately report all malfunctioning third party equipment to the appropriate 
personnel so proper maintenance can be performed. 
Instructed  rig  personnel  to  utilize  the  bleed-off  valve  to  release  potential  stored  pressure  prior  to 
disconnecting all hose lines. 
Instructed  rig  personnel  that  a  pressure  gauge  should  be  installed  on  the  pump  to  indicate  when  the 
system is under pressure. 
Informed  rig  personnel  that  they  should  ask  for  instructions  on  the  safe  operating  procedure  of  any 
company owned or 3rd party equipment. 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2012 

