Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 02 
 

DRILLING WITH AIR, AERATED MUD OR FOAM 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  rig  was  drilling  with  foam  and  compressed  air  was  being  injected  at  the  standpipe  manifold  at 
approximately 800psi.  After drilling the Kelly down, the driller contacted the third party air drilling vendor to 
initiate the connection process.  The third party service hand diverted the air to the blow-down line but did not 
close the supply valve to the standpipe manifold.  The driller pumped the required fluid volume to displace 
the  pipe  with  fluid  to  the  BHA  check  valve.    The  lower  Kelly  valve  (LKV)  was  closed  and  the  connection 
broken  off  in  the  rotary  table.  The  Kelly  was  made-up  to  the  mouse  hole  joint  and  the  rig  crewmember 
opened  the  LKV.    Compressed  air  trapped  inside  the  Kelly  blew  down  through  the  mouse  hole  joint  and 
came  out  through  the  top  of  the  mouse  hole.    The  crewmember  was  startled  by  the  incident  and  slipped 
while moving away from the mouse hole, injuring his shoulder and arm.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  connection  procedure  was  not  followed  correctly.    The  procedure  called  for  the  compressed  air  to  be 
bypassed through a bypass line and the supply valve to be closed.  The supply valve was left in the open 
position and backpressure from the bypass line forced air into the Kelly.  
 
Underlying Causes: 
 
The  communication  between  the  drilling  contractor  and  third  party  air  vendor  was  not  sufficient.    The  JSA 
was verbal and no written procedures for bleeding down the system and checking for trapped pressure were 
in place.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  Written  procedures  for  making  connections  and  tripping  have  been  developed  and  posted  at  the 

driller’s station. 

 

 

•  An independent bleed off valve/line at the standpipe manifold will be installed and procedures shall 

mandate this valve be opened prior to breaking the Kelly connection. 

•  No  rig  shall  begin  air/foam  drilling  operations  until  the  Operations  Manager  has  reviewed  and 

approved the specific rig up and operating procedures. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  See IADC HSE Reference Guide Section 18  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2007 

