Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 38 
 

MUD PUMP MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS  

RESULTS IN A FACE INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the night mechanic was assisting senior mechanic in removing chain driven sprocket from mud pump, a 
puller and jack were being used for this job.  Everybody was clear during the operation then it was decided to 
release pressure from the jack to check progress of the job.  The puller and jack were secured by rope and 
chain to avoid being dropped, while removing the puller, which has 2 long studs; the end of one stud struck the 
injured person on left cheek.  The injured person suffered a small cut (2cm long) 5cm from his left eye.  The 
injured person took a medical treatment and returned to work.    
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Task assessment was not done properly. 
•  The injured person was in the improper position for the task. 
•  Lack of attention and communication between crewmembers, involved with this job. 
•  Pre-job safety meeting was not conducted / complete.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel: 
 
• 
•  Pre-job safety meeting to be conducted including all personnel in the work group participating in the job. 
•  Supervisors  should  check  to  see  if  the  crewmember(s)  fully  understand  the  task  precautions  while 

JSA should be done prior to non-routine jobs and discussed with all crewmembers. 

working.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:  Refer to IADC Accident Prevention Reference Guide:  Section 1.4 on JSAs 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued October 2003 

