 

 

 

 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 05 

AIR WINCH LINE CAUGHT IN DERRICK FINGERS RESULTS IN AN EMPLOYEE BEING 

PULLED OFF OF THE RIG FLOOR 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
While rigging up a  fill and circulation (FAC) tool, the air winch line became trapped in the fingers on the derrick.  This 
prevented  the  tool  from  aligning  with  the  wellbore  for  installation.    The  tool  was  lowered  in  to  the  V-door  to  take  the 
weight off and thus free the cable.  As an employee pulled the cable free from the derrick fingers it jerked violently pulling 
the employee off of the rig floor.  The employee was thrown approximately 10  feet (3 meters) off of the rig floor and fell 
striking his head on the edge of the V-door.  The employee then fell another 20 feet (6 meters) to the ground. 

 

 

 

Training on FAC tool rig-up and potential hazards was lacking.  
If the FAC tool needs to be laid out it must be placed on the catwalk and not the V-door stop. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 
• 
•  Situational awareness was a big factor.  Due to the amount of people involved and the operation in progress when 
the accident occurred, the attention to detail should have been better.  The rig floor was congested from the stand 
point of personnel on the floor; and drill pipe that was racked back in the derrick did impair visibility. 
The guards on the rig floor were not used when picking up equipment through the V-door. 

• 
•  Speed  while  rigging  up  was  an  issue.    The  injured  employee,  who  took  the  air  winch  line  away  from  two  other 

personnel, jerked it free from the derrick fingers.  The potential danger had not been identified nor addressed.  
There was no verification that the air winch line was clear of the derrick fingers prior to picking up the tool. 
The drill pipe in the derrick impaired the air winch line operator's vision on the location of the air winch line. 
Improper placement of the FAC tool on the Pipe Stop on the V-door also contributed to the accident.  The tool was 
set  on  the  stop  in  a  semi  vertical  position.    An  approximately  8  foot  (2.4  meters)  hose  was  on  the  bottom  of  the 
assembly.    When  the  weight  was  taken  off  of  the  tool  assembly,  the  hose  flexed  and  allowed  the  tool  to  lower 
approximately 4 feet (1.2 meters).  This action removed the slack instantly from the air winch line. 

• 
• 
• 

 

 

• 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

The  company  reminded  all  rig  personnel  that if  the  V-door guards  are not  in  place, fall  protection should be  used 
when working in this area. 
Through a company approved safety alert, the company communicated to all service personnel what had happened 
to increase awareness during this operation. 
The company instructed all drillers to verify that the air winch line is not out of position on the derrick fingers prior to 
picking up the tool. If the derrick finger barriers are available, they should be verified that they are in place. 
The  company  instituted  a  policy  change  that  does  not  allow  their  personnel  to  operate  the  rigs  equipment.  
Personnel are to only operate their company specific equipment. 

• 

• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2014 

