Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 01 
 

PERSONNEL HOISTING INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was pressure testing the BOP’s and various members were attending to different tasks in preparation to 
drilling  out  the  surface  casing  shoe.    The upper  Kelly  cock  did  not  hold  its  pressure  for  the  required  time  so  the 
decision  was  made  to  adjust  the  valve  and  retest.    The  floorhand  put  on  his  fall  arrest  harness  and  the  driller 
hoisted  him  up  12  metres  (40  ft.)  above  the  rig  floor  using  the  winch  line.    From  that  position  he  could  turn  the 
valve slightly and then they could retest.  When this was accomplished, the driller started to lower him back down 
on  the  winch  line.    For  reasons  that  cannot  be  explained,  the  floorhand  swung  himself  over  to  the  derrick  leg 
supported his own weight and the line went slack.  It appears that he disconnected from the winch line, lost his grip 
on the derrick and fell about 10 metres (33 ft) to the floor. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Improper procedure and lack of fall protection.  Using a non-man rated winchline to hoist personnel is prohibited.  
Company PPE Policy and Safe Work Practices state: ”All work 3 metres (10 ft) or more above the rig floor must be 
performed using a safety harness attached to a lanyard.”  Other Industry Safety Alerts and Memo’s over the past 
year  or  so  have  addressed  this  procedure  and  the  need  to  use  self-retracting  lifelines  when  ascending  or 
descending the derrick.  The sign at the bottom of the rig mast (affixed to the Drillers’ console) states “Attention – 
Climbing device must be worn when working on derrick”.  The climbing device mentioned incorporates a full body 
safety  harness  with  chest  D-ring  for  attaching  to  the  self-retracting  lifeline  (SRL)  and  a  back  D-ring  with  an 
attached shock absorber.  The chest D-ring is attached to the SRL when ascending and descending the derrick.  
The  rear  D-ring  with  shock  absorber  is  attached  to  a  safety  lanyard  of  suitable  length.    This  is  to  be  used  when 
working at the monkeyboard or at other locations in the derrick.  Company Fall Protection Policies and Safe Work 
procedures were not followed in this case. 
 
Contributing Factors and Root Causes:  Recent industry safety alerts (PSC #38-2004) indicate that there has 
been a practice of using the winchline (connected to the fall protection harness) to hoist personnel into a position 
where  they  can  perform  elevated  work.    Although  this  practice  appears  to  be  more  prominent  and  perhaps 
tolerated  in  the  other  sectors  of  the  local  oil  and  gas  industry,  it  was  against  the  drilling  contractor’s  company 
policies and safe work practices.   
 
In addition to the above factors, obstructed visibility, poor communication, and lack of proper signaling may have 
complicated  an  unacceptable  and  unsafe  work  practice.    Although  a  Safety  Meeting  was  conducted  with  the 
Pressure  Tester  it  appears  that  fall  protection  issues  were  not  a  component  of  the  documented  pre-job  safety 
discussion or later when the job tasks were modified due to adjust the leaking valve.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The  company  reinforced  existing  standards  associated  with  raising  personnel,  fall  protection  requirements,  and 
safe work procedures.   
 
Crews  were  directed  to  discuss  Occupational  Health  &  Safety  Code  Part  37  –  Section  770,  and  related  Safety 
Alerts/Bulletins  (CAODC  General  Bulletin  02-12,  PSC  Safety  Alert:  #38-2004)  and  record  their  responses  in  the 
Rig Site Health and Safety Committee Minutes.   
The company directed that while pressure testing, all upper Kelly-cocks be adjusted at the rig floor.  If the valve 
does  not  hold  pressure,  the  pressure  is  to  be  bled  off,  the  annular  preventer  opened  and  the  Kelly  lowered  to 
where the valve can be operated safely from the floor.  It can then be raised back into position and retested. 
Additional crewmembers will be trained in the industry Fall Protection for Rig Workers Course. 
Rig Managers must enforce health and safety rules, which are a condition of employment.  Failure to wear proper 
fall protection and adhere to safe work practices is grounds for dismissal. 
The company is also assessing the need for man-rated lifting equipment and reviewing fall protection JSA’s. 
 
IADC Note:  See Alerts – 01-02, 01-16, 02-32, 02-54, 03-18, 03-37, and Section 19 of the IADC HSE Reference 
Guide. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2005 

