Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 01  
 

RUPTURED PISTON ON MUD PUMP  

LEADS TO PUMP HOUSE FIRE 

 
 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig was drilling at approximately 2,030m (6,660 feet) with invert (oil and water mixture) drilling fluid in the 
tanks,  pumping  with  approximately  21,500  kPa  (3,118  psi)  pump  pressure.    The  rig  crew  noticed  smoke 
coming  out  of  pump  house  #1.    The  rig  crew  gathered  all  the  fire  extinguishers  on  site  (five  –  30lb  (13kg) 
extinguishers and two – 150lbs (68kg) extinguishers, from the tank farm) and attempted to extinguish the fire.  
The crew was unsuccessful; therefore, the Driller and Rig Manager shut-in the well.  The fire spread to pump 
house  #2,  then  over  to  the  mixing  area  of  the  mud  tanks  causing  fire  damage  to  the  mud  tank  platform 
behind the buildings and to the contents on the platform.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  The piston/pump rod covers on the on the F-1000 mud pump were left in the open position and made 
from  expanded  metal  screen  material  which  allowed  the  drilling  fluid  to  spray  out  from  the  mud  pump 
piston rod cavity and back to the engine area. 

  Fire originated in pump house #1 when the drilling fluid contacted the turbo charger of the engine located 

  The probable cause of the fire was a ruptured piston in the mud pump that allowed invert drilling fluid to 

in the pump house building and ignited.  

spray throughout the pump house. 

  Because of the pressure in the mud pump system, aided by the turbulence in the pump house from the 
cooling fan on the opposite side of the engine, the oil in the invert was atomized (reduced to a fine spray) 
which  then  ignited  when  it  came  into  direct  contact  with  the  nearer  of  the  two  turbochargers  on  the 
engine. 

  Electrical and other mechanical causes for this fire were considered and eliminated. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig personnel to install hinged plated covers or covers with Lexan® Glass inserts on all mud 
pumps to ensure any drilling fluid from ruptured pistons will be contained within the piston rod cavity of 
the mud pump.  Some plate covers may require a slot to accommodate the piston lubricator hose. 
Instructed rig personnel that all pump rod covers are to be kept closed during pumping operations. 
Issued a directive that all engines located in the mud pump house will have exhaust blankets or wraps to 
protect the turbochargers and exhausts on the engines from being sprayed with drilling fluid. 

 
 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2012 

