Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 05  

FALL INCIDENT DURING RIG UP 

RESULTS IN FATAL INJURIES 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A drilling rig was being re-assembled on a new well location.  The driller was working with a crane operator 
and  another  drilling  rig  employee  to  properly  position  the  doghouse  on  the  rig  platform.    To  ensure  the 
doghouse  was  in  its  proper  position,  the  driller  laid  down  on  a  folding  work  platform  adjacent  to  the 
doghouse.  The platform had been placed on the rig supports, but was not secured in place.  As the driller 
moved out onto this platform it tilted and fell, causing him to fall 5 meters (16.5 feet) with the platform landing 
on top of him.  The other drilling rig employee immediately summoned help.  The platform was removed from 
on  top  of  the  employee  and  first  aid  was  rendered.  Following  arrival  of  the  emergency  services,  the  driller 
was confirmed to have died. 
 

MAJOR CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 
 
The investigation team determined two key 
immediate causes for the fall:  
 
  The  platform  that  fell  had  been  placed  in 
position on the rig and left unsecured for a 
significant amount of time. 

  Fall  protection/PPE  was  not  used,  despite 
working  on  a  ledge  where  the  risk  of a  fall 
was 5 meters (16.5 feet). 

 

 
 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Following the incident investigation and identification of root causes, the company made the following 
recommendations: 
 
 

Instructed rig personnel to ensure all tasks performed where there is a risk of falling more than 1.8 
meters (5.9 feet) are completed using fall protection/PPE. This must be a “no exception” rule. 
Instructed rig supervisors to ensure appropriate rig supervision are provided at all times to ensure higher 
risk tasks are performed properly and with the appropriate controls in place to prevent incidents. 
Instructed rig personnel to utilize a rig specialist to check all existing rig structure elements in the 
Contract Drilling Group to ensure compliance with original manufacturers’ design specifications.  Out of 
compliance changes will be identified and corrected through proper engineering design improvements. 
Implemented technical review audits of all rigs to ensure operational compliance to the established 
global standards. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2011 

