Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 27  
 

HIDDEN WELDING LEAD RESULTS IN MINOR ELECTRICAL SHOCK 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two  scaffold  builders  were  assembling  a  covered  scaffold  inside  a  boiler  while  concurrent  welding  and 
blasting activities were taking place.  Scaffold builder “A” used his hammer to line up an angle support and 
unknowingly contacted a welding cable which was hidden below the scaffold post rosette.  The scaffold post 
contacted  the  exposed  wire  which  resulted  in  an  electrical  arc  to  travel  up  the  post  to  a  scaffold  support 
brace which was being held above by scaffold builder “B”.  Scaffold builder “B” received an electrical jolt from 
the current traveling through the brace.    
 

 

 

Scaffold Rosette 

Damaged Cable 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Earlier,  the  scaffold  builders  identified  the  welding  cable  as  a  tripping  hazard  and  had  inadvertently 

placed it in the hammering line of fire when they moved it. 

•  The scaffold builders did not recognize the electrical hazard of the cable. 
•  Lighting inside the covered scaffold was inadequate. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All trades working inside the boiler were reminded that all electrical cables and cords should be placed 

so that they cannot be damaged by the work activities. 

•  All  trades  were  reminded  to  communicate  with  other  companies  in  their  work  area  before  and  during 
concurrent  work  activities.    This  should  include  Life  Saving  Actions  -  Work  Authorization,  pre-job 
planning and hazard identification. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2012 

