Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 13 

 

RIG MOVE - CAUGHT BETWEEN TRUCK AND LOAD 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig moving crew was loading rig equipment in order to move to a new location.  A Pre-Tour meeting had 
been held with both crews.  A floorman (injured person [IP]) was caught between the generator house skid 
and the truck that was backing up to prepare to load the generator house.  Another driver observed the IP 
caught between the truck and generator house and shouted for the truck driver to stop.  Due to this driver’s 
attention,  the  IP  avoided  more  serious  injury.    The  IP  was  taken  to  the  hospital  for  precautionary  X-rays, 
which  came  back  negative  and  he  was  released  to  return  to  duty.    The  worker  suffered  some  pain  at  his 
chest area and minor bruising.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The IP was not aware of the hazard of placing himself between the generator and the moving truck.  
  The IP put himself in an improper position for the task, without communicating to others his intentions. 
  The truck driver could not see the IP behind the truck trailer bed.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed all rig personnel in the 
following: 
 
  Reminded  the  crew  involved  in  moving  the  rig  that  in  the  past  few  months  there  have  been  several 
crushing type incidents throughout the oil and gas drilling industry that have resulted in injury and even 
the death of personnel.   

  We  must  learn  from  the  mistakes  made  by  others  so  that  we  don’t  experience  the  same  results 

  Pre-job meetings, Job Safety Analysis, STOPTM, and Safety in Motion are all tools that are designed to 

ourselves.   

help us eliminate unsafe conditions.   

  We must use our training and past experiences to eliminate these unsafe conditions that exist, in order to 

minimize the chance of injury to ourselves and our fellow workers.  

  Communication is the key to working safely. 
  Each individual must use a questioning attitude on every job we do.  If there is a possibility that you or 

another employee might be injured, the job must be stopped and evaluated for a safer work procedure to 
be followed.  One moment of caution could save a lifetime of regret.  Take the time to work safely, for 
your family and future. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2011 

