Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 
ALERT 02 – 30  
 

INATTENTION WHILE PULLING SLIPS RESULTS 

IN FINGER AMPUTATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
When running the first joint of 9 5/8 Casing, it was decided to check the float to ensure proper operation.  The 
slips were set and the casing filled with mud.  While in the process of picking up the joint casing and as the 
elevators were moving up to make contact with the casing collar, floorman prepared to pull slips with his right 
hand.  Inadvertently he had placed his left hand on top of the elevator.  His fingers were caught between the 
casing collar and the elevator.  His left index finger was severed at the top knuckle and the middle finger tip 
was crushed. 
 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Investigation  findings  indicate  that  employee  was  not  sufficiently  trained  (safety  awareness  including  pinch 
point) nor had employee received any orientation. It was the employees second hitch working on a rig.  Also 
included as a root cause was the unprotected pinch point between collar and elevator.  A safety meeting was 
held prior to running casing in which the crew reviewed a JSA on running casing. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company gave the following directives:   
 

•  Orientations must be performed for all new employees prior to working on rig location. 
•  Behavior Based Training using the company training guide must be done for all crew members. 
• 
• 
• 
•  Knowledge,Skills and Abilities Competency Training must be given to all personnel. 

JSA Training to continue for all crews. 
JSAs to be updated to include this specific pinch point. 
Incident data to be provided to elevator manufacturers for possible design update to elevators. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2002 

