Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 44 
 

BOP OVERHEAD CRANE WIRE LINE FAILURE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a recent Nippling Down and repositioning of the 21 ¼ BOP from the wellhead to the stump the BOP 
Winch Line (the overhead crane) parted allowing the top of the BOP to fall towards the broken line direction.  
Fortunately the BOP had not been lifted high and the bottom of the BOP lodged in the ground preventing it 
from flipping over. The other overhead crane cable was unaffected and a safety sling was fitted to this unit as 
an extra precaution while it was taking all the weight. There was no injury to personnel.  There was however 
damage to flexible control hose from the HCR to the choke manifold requiring the hose to be replaced.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: Investigation Findings 
 
(cid:131)  Wire line was used was as per the original specifications. 
(cid:131)  A lifting equipment inspection was conducted by a third party lifting equipment inspection company.  The 
inspector  claims  that  after  the  inspection  he  told  the  Rig  Manager  that  this  line  was  damaged  and 
needed to be changed out.  The Rig Manager claims he was not made aware of a damage line. 
o  The  two  copies  of  the  report  for  the  above  inspection  were  provided  however  critical  information 

within the reports were different: 
(cid:131)  The paper version said “The inspection of the above equipment was found to be in satisfactory 

(cid:131)  The  electronic  version  said  “The  Wire  Rope  was  found  damaged  (need  to  be  replaced  before 

condition”. 

commencing any lifting operation”. 

(cid:131)  There was no evidence of any Pre Job Meeting held prior to commencing the Nippling Down operation. 
(cid:131)  There was no recorded evidence that periodic or pre job inspection including Monthly PMS routines had 

(cid:131)  The failed line was in poor condition and should have been identified as a hazard between the inspection 

been completed on the failed line  

date and the incident date. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
(cid:131)  The third party inspection company is to check all inspection reports for all other rigs for accuracy and 

relevance. 

(cid:131)  The third party inspection company is to develop a paper trail which will be signed immediately after the 
inspection  is  complete  by  the  Rig  Manager  acknowledging  the  inspection  carried  out  and  any 
discrepancies and/or recommend actions to be taken as a result of the inspection. 

(cid:131)  Rig  Superintendent,  Rig  Managers  to  reinforce  the  importance  of  Pre  Tour/Pre  Job  meeting  and  the 

need to maintain a record of these meeting conducted. 

(cid:131)  Add inspection criteria to Rig Manager Weekly Inspection for wire lines on Overhead BOP Cranes. 
(cid:131)  Enforce Monthly Planned Maintenance routines for Overhead BOP cranes. 
(cid:131)  Adopt  a  12  month  “Out  of  Service”  date  when  wire  lines  for  BOP  Overhead  Cranes  are  change  out 

regardless of its condition at the time. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
Figure 1 – Overhead Crane 

Set-up 

Figure 1 – Anchor end 

approx 10 foot. 

 

Figure 3 – Parted line 

 

 
 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2005 

