Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 15 - 09  
 

NEAR MISS – DROPPED SIX POUND SLEDGE HAMMER 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
During drilling operations it was noticed that the vibrating hose connecting the sections of stand pipe 
between the strong back and mast stem was leaking. The rig shut down and removed the damaged 
vibrating hose while waiting for a replacement to arrive on location. Prior to installing the replacement 
hose, the derrickman retrieved the stop drop tool kit and other required tools. A six pound sledge 
hammer with a tethered tool lanyard was selected and clipped to his boatswain belt; he then raised 
himself into position with the “man rider.” While being raised the sledge hammer hung up under a 
mast girt causing the ring on the tool lanyard to fail, this allowed the hammer to fall approximately 20 
feet to the rig floor. The hammer landed by the iron roughneck, about 10 feet away from the flagger 
who was positioned on the driller’s side of the setback area. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
The hammer was not properly stowed to the body while being raised into position. The 
derrickman nor the spotter noticed the hammer hung under the girt while being raised into 
position.  
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
Hoisted personnel shall properly stow the tools to their body while being raised into position. A 
small carabineer can be secured to the harness and the working end of the tool should be 
fastened to the carabineer via the tethered lanyard while being raised into position. The tool 
shall not hang below the hoisted person. More than one spotter may be necessary when a 
person is being hoisted throughout the mast. The drop tool kit is equipped with a tool bag that 
could also be used to stow the tools until reaching the desired working position.  
 

Tool lanyard with broken ring 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright  2015 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

be applied to their own situations and practices 

Issued October 2015 

