Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 29 
 

RIG MOVE VEHICLE INCIDENT 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A lowboy truck loaded with a 60 ton (≈ 55 Mg) crane was driven onto the new location.  The driver made a 
U-turn and while leaving the new location the truck came close to the edge and its left rear tires penetrated 
deeply into the un-compacted edge of the recently built up access road.  The lowboy started to tilt slowly 
towards the road side and due to the added load of the crane tipped on its side.  Both the lowboy and crane 
landed on its left side.  There were no injuries to personnel. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  The Rig site access road construction was not properly engineered as the road side compaction was 

not adequate and has a left slight curve at the entrance. 

•  Road survey was not properly done by the truck pushers / senior tool pusher as the roadside 

uncompacted sand was not observed, highlighted or repaired, presenting a hazard for the heavy load.  

•  Rig move trucks were not properly controlled by the truck pushers.  Three trucks were parked on the 

location access road as no parking area had been prepared for heavy move trucks. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig move preparation procedure to be followed by truck pusher(s) and rig senior toolpusher prior to 

start rig move and documented by completion of the checklist. 
In  preparation  of  new  location,  the  company  Minimum  Requirements  for  Land  Rig  Drilling  location 
procedure is to be followed by construction engineer(s). 

•  Movement of rig move trucks is to be controlled in order to ensure proper road traffic and parking. 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2008 

 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 

