Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

NEAR MISS—LOST CONTROL OF DRAWWORKS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  stand  of  drill  pipe  had  been  drilled  down  using  the  top  drive.    The  Assistant  Driller  (AD)  was  at  the 
drawworks  controls  but  allowed  the  pipe  to  be  drilled  low  enough  to  “trip”  the  low  level  setting  of  the 
Crown/Floor Protection Device (CFPD).  The AD then activated the manual bypass to continue drilling down 
one more foot.  Once he drilled down the extra foot, the AD attempted to pick up the drill string with one hand 
on  the  clutch  and  the  other  on  the  Crown/Floor  Protection  Device  bypass  control.    The  AD  was  unable  to 
accelerate  the  motors  enough  to  get  the  drawworks  to  start  hoisting  and  the  drawworks  spooled  off  the 
drilling line rather than picking up the drill string.  The elevators set down on the rotary table and the elevator 
links impacted the bottom of the topdrive, bending the elevator links.    

 
ALERT 07 – 17 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

The rig personnel were taught to perform this procedure in this incorrect manner.  The proper procedure for 
deactivating the Crown/Floor Protection Device was the subject of a recent memo and was added to the 
HSE Manual and training was supposed to have been done.  The following is from this procedure:   

“When the CFPD is momentarily bypassed, i.e., working long stands, the immediate supervisor of the person 
performing the bypass must be notified and must approve the bypass.  The approving supervisor must also 
directly supervise the activity until the operation is completed and the CFPD’s function is restored.”   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to 
rig supervisors and personnel: 
 

This incident is a prime example of where failing to “walk the talk”, can have serious consequences.   

 

 

•  Rig personnel must understand that safe operating procedures are put in place to ensure that incidents 

don’t happen, however the procedures must be followed by all involved.   

•  Supervisors are continually being observed by their crews to determine what level of safety is expected.  
•  When supervisors perform or instruct personnel to perform tasks in the accepted safe manner, they are 

passing on proper methods of working safely to all personnel involved.   

•  Supervisors and rig crews need to remember that the key to the preventing unsafe acts is intervention.   

(cid:131)  Dialog, discussion, talking with people are all forms of intervention.   
(cid:131)  Without intervention, unsafe behavior continues on the same misdirected course until “what can 

go wrong, will go wrong”.   

•  Supervisors:  Are safe work practices “expected” by you on your rig?  If so, let others know! 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2007 

