Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

IMPROPER SLINGING RESULTS IN A FATALITYAND TWO LTIs 

critically injured to head and died on the way to the hospital.  

 

 

the  lifting  accessories.    According  to  procedures,  lifting  all 
sections together was never done before. 
The  Assistant  Driller  did  not  consider  the  chains  unfit  for 
purpose.    Two  Floormen  failed  to  stop  an  unsafe  act.  
Workers  involved  did  not  recognize  the  incorrect  rigging 
they were applying to lift the load. 

 
ALERT 04 – 03  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

Using  a  crane  the  mast  was  lifted  and  attached  to  the 
rotary beam support and side legs.  It was then lowered 
and  pinned  to  the  set  back  assembly.    The  assistant 
driller  decided  to  vary  from  previous  lift  procedures  and 
had the assembly lifted so that they could gain access to 
bolts that were in the toolbox located in the off driller side 
of  the  substructure  base.    While  lifting  the  assembled 
section,  the  chains  broke.    The  Assistant  Driller  and 
Floorman  were  working  under  the  load  and  the  second 
Floorman  was  knelling  on  top  of  the  beam  with  his  fall 
protection  on.    Two  Floormen  sustained  injuries  and 
were treated in the hospital, but the Assistant driller was 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

In the pre-tour meeting, the Senior Toolpusher instructed 
the relief crew to work on other projects and not to work 
on the mast assembly.  The relief crew works under the 
direct  supervision  of  the  Tour  Pusher,  who  had  not 
arrived  on  the  site  due  to  travel  delays.    The  Crane 
Operator arrived after the meeting and was not aware of 
the instructions given to the relief crew.  Rigging used to 
raise  the  mast  and  install  the  rotary  beam  support  legs 
was  not  readjusted  for  hoisting  the  set  back  assembly.  
In  addition,  the  sling  assembly  was  rated  for  21.4  tons 
and the load was 23 tons.  The Assistant Driller and the 
two Floormen were under the radius of the load and the 
third  Floorman  was  standing  on  the  load.    The  Crane 
Operator  lifted  the  load  without  warning  the  crew  to 
leave  the  working  radius  of  the  crane.    The  Crane 
Operator did not assess the lifting risk before raising the 
section  with  the  set  back  pinned  and  he  did  not  check 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following and instructed personnel to: 

•  Developed and implemented a detailed Lifting Management Plan for mast sub frame assembly.  Review lifting 

•  Clarified roles and responsibilities in lifting operations (Crane operators, Tour Pusher and relief crew) and consider 

arrangements for rotary table support frame.  

dedicated rigger/operator for lifting operations. 

•  Revised lifting gear management plan for drill site and prepared a daily checklist for mobile crane on the drilling site.  
•  Established a baseline competency profile for crane operators and riggers and assess them against it.  The base line 

competency may include additional training and replacement to rectify any gaps. 
• 
Provided means of communication for remote operati
•  Revaluated disciplinary actions for safety violations.  
•  Encourage culture to STOP unsafe work and continue to reinforce the hazard aw
•  Prepare daily written work instructions to Tour Pusher for relief crew operations. 

ons on the project. 

areness. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2004 

