Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 17  
 

FALL FROM HEIGHTS RESULTS IN FATALITY 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The derrick had been lowered to the ground for disassembly and two of the three cranes were set up to start 
taking  apart  the  substructure.    A  crane  rigger  and  four  other  rig  employees  went  up  to  the  substructure  to 
start  knocking  pins  out  of  the  spreaders  so  the  crane  slings  could  tie  on  to  them  and  lower  them  to  the 
ground.  The first piece that needed to be removed from the substructure was the off-driller-side rotary beam.  
The crane rigger had attached the crane chains/cables to the rotary beam and, using hand signals, notified 
the crane operator to begin lifting the rotary beam.  As the beam was being lifted, the crane  rigger noticed 
that the chains were not centered, thus causing the beam to be lifted unevenly, which caused it to get in a 
bind.  The crane rigger signaled for the crane operator to stop his lift and slack off so he could re-position the 
chains on the beam.  The crane rigger then stepped out onto the beam; when he did, the beam came free 
and fell, allowing him to fall approximately 30 feet (9m) to the matting boards below.  Despite the efforts of 
co-workers and EMS, the crane rigger died from his injuries sustained in the fall. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  Even though the crane rigger was wearing fall protection; he was not tied-off. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  All employees were reminded that the use of fall protection equipment and 100% tie-off is required for 
anyone working at levels above 4 feet (1.2m) where railings are not provided or have been removed. 

•  All employees were instructed to immediately shut down any operation and conduct a safety 

meeting/review if a safety violation is observed. 

•  The company re-emphasized their Stop-Work Policy to all employees.  Employees were reminded that 

there will never be any retribution for implementing the Stop Work Policy, regardless of whether the work 
stoppage turns out to be real or perceived. 

•  All employees were reminded that anyone caught violating any safety rule/regulation will be asked to 

immediately leave the location and not be allowed to return without management approval the company. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2013 

