Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After  attending  a  conference  in  the  United  States  an  employee  flew  to  London  then  on  to  Dubai.    When 
arriving  in  Dubai  the  employee  noticed  severe  swelling  in  his  left  leg.    He  entered  the  hospital  and  was 
diagnosed  with  deep  vein  thrombosis  (DVT).    There  have  also  cases  of  DVT  reported  in  the  oil  and  gas 
industry that have occurred when a driver(s) spent a long time driving a vehicle without taking a break.   

 
ALERT 10 – 35 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT:  

Deep vein thrombosis, or DVT, is a blood clot that forms in a vein deep in the body.  Most deep vein clots 
occur  in  the  lower  leg  or  thigh  but  can  form  in  other  parts  of  the  body.    If  the  vein  swells,  the  condition  is 
called thrombophlebitis.  A deep vein thrombosis can break loose and cause a serious problem in the lung, 
called  a  pulmonary  embolism  (PE),  or  a  heart  attack  or  a  stroke.    PE  is  a  very  serious  condition.    It  can 
damage the lungs and other organs in the body and cause death. 

Blood clots can form in your body's deep veins if: 

  Damage occurs to a vein's inner lining.  This damage may result from injuries caused by physical, 
chemical, or biological factors.  Such factors include surgery, serious injury, inflammation, and an 
immune response.  

  Blood flow is sluggish or slow.  Lack of motion can cause sluggish or slow blood flow.  This may 

occur after surgery, if you're ill and in bed for a long time, or if you're traveling for a long time in the 
same position (i.e., seated on a plane).  

  Your blood is thicker or more likely to clot than normal.  Certain inherited conditions (such as factor V 

Leiden) increase blood's tendency to clot.  This also is true of treatment with hormone therapy or 
birth control pills.  

Sitting  still  for  a  long  time  can  make  you  more  likely  to  get  a  DVT.    Some  medicines  and  disorders  that 
increase your risk for blood clots can also lead to DVTs.  Only about half of the people who have DVT have 
signs  or  symptoms.    These  signs  and  symptoms  occur  in  the  leg  affected  by  the  deep  vein  clot.    They 
include: 

  Swelling of the leg or along a vein in the leg  

  Pain or tenderness in the leg, which you may feel only when standing or walking  

 

Increased warmth in the area of the leg that's swollen or in pain  

  Red or discolored skin on the leg  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this condition employees should: 

Treatment includes medicines to ease pain and inflammation, break up clots and keep new clots from 
forming. Keeping the affected area raised and applying moist heat can also help.   

Your risk of developing DVT while traveling is small.  The risk increases if the travel time is longer than 4 
hours or you have other DVT risk factors.  During long trips, it may help to: 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
  Every hour and a half, walk up and down the aisles of the bus, train, or airplane.  If traveling by car, stop 
about every hour and walk around.  If you can't get up to walk around, try raising and lowering your heels 
while keeping your toes on the floor, then raising your toes while your heels are on the floor. 

  Move your legs and flex and stretch your feet to encourage blood flow in your calves.  

  Wear loose and comfortable clothing.  

  Drink plenty of fluids and avoid alcohol.  

If  you  are  at  increased  risk  for  DVT,  your  doctor  may  recommend  wearing  compression  stockings  while 
traveling or taking a blood-thinning medicine before traveling. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2010 

