Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

LACK OF COMMUNICATION RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 
ALERT 14 – 11 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 

A Mechanic suffered a fatal injury while repairing the iron roughneck (integral to the Pipe Handling Machine – [PHM]) on 
the rig floor.   
 
The operation at the time was breaking out and laying down the BOP test assembly when a hydraulic hose burst on the 
iron roughneck.  A decision was made to continue laying out the pipe using manual tongs with the PHM upper and lower 
racking arms.  The Mechanic was notified and he came to the Drill Floor via the unrestricted (“green”) access stairway.   
 
The  Mechanic  identified  the  burst  hose  and  told  the  Driller  he  would  check  if  there  was  a  spare.    The  Driller  told  the 
Mechanic that the crew would continue to lay down tubulars and would be using the PHM.   
 
The Mechanic left the Drill Floor and returned via the restricted access port-side stairway and walked to the rear of the 
PHM.  Signage on the port stairway and on the access gate behind the PHM requires that the Driller be notified prior to 
entering the rig floor or the area behind the iron roughneck.  No one saw the Mechanic arrive on the rig floor and he did 
not announce his arrival.   
 
The  iron  roughneck  was  in  “single” mode  and in  this position  the  iron  roughneck  inner  carriage is  extended out  of  the 
carriage’s frame resulting in a 16 inch (41cm) gap between the iron roughneck and the rear access cover.  The Mechanic 
climbed  over  the  rear  bumper  bars on  the  PHM  and  entered  into  the  16 inch  (41cm)  gap  between  the  iron  roughneck 
inner carriage and the rear access cover.   
 
The  Assistant  Driller  functioned  the  PHM  to  “normal”  mode  (which  causes  the  iron  roughneck  inner  carriage  to  retract 
back into the assembly frame) and then functioned the PHM to rotate to the aft set-back area to pick up a stand of pipe.   
 
The Assistant Driller looked in the direction of the PHM/iron roughneck and noticed red coveralls at the back of the iron 
roughneck and immediately stopped the PHM. At the same time the drill crew shouted that someone was trapped inside 
the iron roughneck.  The Driller came out of his cabin and realized the Mechanic had been trapped in the iron roughneck.  
His injuries were fatal. 

 

Iron Roughneck, Inner Carriage Extended 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2014 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Burst hose was in this area 

Piston for extending and retracting 
inner carriage. The carriage is shown 
extended leaving a gap of 
approximately 16 inches between 
inner carriage and inside of rear 
access cover 

 

 

Mechanic climbed in through 
the upper space in the rear 
access cover 

Rear of Iron Roughneck, Inner Carriage Extended 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

Inadequate  Communication  -  Mechanic  returned  to  the  worksite  via  a  restricted  access  and  commenced  intrusive 
work on the iron roughneck without notifying the Driller or the drill crew, even though he had been informed that the 
PHM was required for operations. 

•  Routine non-compliance with Energy Isolation Requirements – rig floor hydraulic equipment was worked on routinely 

without effective isolation 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  Enhanced Control-of-Work Process 
•  Reinforced restricted access, all personnel must pass through the Drillers Cabin before accessing Rig Floor 
•  Reviewed all Rig Specific Procedures for operation of remotely operated equipment 
•  Placed signage stating “This Equipment May Be Remotely Operated” 

• 
• 

Installed expanded metal screen on iron roughneck rear and side access points 
Installed a retractable barrier to restrict access between iron roughneck and existing handrails 

•  Clearly communicated that compliance with requirements exceeds all “operational pressures” 
• 

Liaised with Equipment Manufacturer regarding installation of guards 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2014 

