Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

WORKING WITH ROTATING CONTROL DEVICES 

 
ALERT 08 – 01 

 

 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

Incident  #1  -  The  rotating  control  device  (RCD)  was  leaking  so  the  driller  sent  an  employee  to  open  the 
clamp on it.  When the driller used the drawworks to hoist the pipe and pull the rotating control device from 
the bowl, the gasket was pulled out.  The employee was attempting to replace the gasket when the rotating 
control  device  slid  down  the  pipe  smashing  his  hand  between  it  and  the  bowl  severely  injuring  the 
employee’s hand. 
Incident #2 - The spinning chain was being used to spin up the joint of pipe that had the RCD on it.  As the 
pipe  was  turned  up,  the  RCD  slid  down  the  pipe  and  smashed  the  employee’s  thumb  between  it  and  the 
spinning chain. 
Incident  #3  -  The  crew  was  installing  the  RCD  on  4  ½  inch  casing.    The  RCD  slid  down  the  pipe  and 
smashed the employee’s finger between it and the casing slips. 
Incident  #4  -  Crew  was  nippling  up  the  RCD  to  the  BOP  stack.    As  the  control  device  was  lowered  the 
injured employee’s finger was smashed between it and one of the studs. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Incident #1 - The driller assumed the employee was clear of the rotating control device and pulled the 
control device through the floor.  There was a lack of communication between the injured and the driller. 
Incident #2 & #3 – There was no efforts made to secure the rotating control device to prevent it from sliding 
down the drill pipe as it was turned up. 
Incident  #4  –  There  was  a  lack  of  communication  between  the  men  on  the  rig  floor  and  the  personnel 
working below the rotary table. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Incident #1 
•  Driller shall ensure all crewmembers are clear before engaging the drawworks to hoist the pipe. 
•  Using the sling provided by the RCD rental company, rig crews are to attach the air hoist to the rotating 

control device before pulling it through the floor.   
Instruct employees to wait until the bushings are back in the table before working under the rotary table. 

• 
Incidents #2 & #3 
•  The stand of pipe with the rotating control device shall be “walked-in” using chain tongs.  Do not use the 

spinning chain or pipe spinners to makeup this stand. 

•  Keep the rotating control device as close to the lower tool joint as possible. 
•  Secure the RCD with the air hoist prior to pulling the slips. 
Incident #4 
•  Maintain good communication between the personnel on the rig floor and personnel working below the 

•  Use flagmen, spotters or other means of communication to ensure all personnel are aware of where and 

rotary table. 

when the equipment is to be moved. 

 
Other Considerations When Working With the Rotating Control Device 
 
•  Conduct a pre-job safety meeting before starting a project.  Ensure all employees know what and how it 

is to be done. 

•  All  rigs  should  write  or  review  a  JSA  for  this  job.    Ensure  all  employees  who  are  not  familiar  with  the 

operation review the JSA before starting the project. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  Since  the  least  experienced  crew  member  is  usually  the  man  sent  to  conduct  work  below  the  rotary 
table,  strong  consideration  should  be  given  to  sending  a  more  experienced  employee.    If  an 
inexperienced crew member must be used it is critical the employee understands exactly what is to be 
done and how to do it safely.  Quiz the employee to ensure ALL aspects of the task are understood. 

•  Always wear proper fall protection while working in an elevated work site. 
•  Ensure  all  employees  working  under  the  rotary  table  are  aware  of  the  potential  for  some  types  of  fall 

protection to become entangled in the rotating equipment. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2008 

