Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 24  

THREE DROPPED-OBJECT INCIDENTS OCCUR  

WHILE TRIPPING OUT OF THE HOLE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Three incidents resulted in separate dropped-object incidents.  They are: 
 
1.  While the driller was picking up the pipe in the slips, the hydraulic hose on the elevators came loose and 

the elevators opened.   

2.  During a trip out of the hole the driller was in the process of setting back a stand of pipe and he opened 
the hydraulic elevators before the stand was fully set back. This resulted in dropping the stand on the rig 
floor. 

3.  Following jarring operations, when pulling out of the hole, the cover on the elevator hydraulic fittings 

came loose and fell toward the floor.  The derrickman noticed the cover had moved and caught it! 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

1.  Quick connect fittings were substituted for the original equipment swivel connections on the hoses. 
2. 

Inadequate procedure: A new procedure required the Driller to not touch the open switch until the stand 
touches the pipe rack. 

3.  The cover did not have a safety strap in place as did the Off-Driller’s Side cover.  Jarring took place for 

several days before a comprehensive inspection of the top drive took place.   

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Remember to use the original equipment recommended by the manufacturer.  
  Substituting equipment may cause serious consequences (as in the case of the quick connect vs. the 
swivel connect).  In this case, the elevators came open while “picking up” the pipe that was still in the 
slips.  The elevators could easily have opened up, thereby dropping a stand on someone’s foot or 
dropping a string down the hole. 

  Hydraulic elevators are nice technology with built-in conveniences; yet there are some problems that are 
being highlighted, such as inadvertently opening them while they are suspending pipe.  In this case, the 
elevator’s “open” function was activated and the pipe could have fallen on someone’s foot.  

  Top drives and auxiliary equipment vastly increase the number of potential “derrick apples” (things that 

can fall on floor-hands); so be sure to examine top drives daily for potential falling objects.   

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2011 

