Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

CONFLICTING PROCEDURES RESULTS IN RESTRICTED WORK CASE 

 
ALERT 13 – 19  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 

A third party surveyor, who was not assigned to the rig, attended the rig during a five (5) year survey.  The surveyor wanted to test the 
lifeboat with an “on-load” release to the water.  The Assistant Barge-Master (ABM) was assisting the surveyor to conduct the test and 
was sitting on a crew seat near the coxswain's seat with his hand flat on the seat to brace for impact.  When the life boat was released 
"on-load,"  it  fell  and  impacted  the  water.    Upon  impact,  a  small  1kg  (2.2lbs)  fire  extinguisher,  which  manufacturer  fitted  near  the 
coxswain’s seat, released from its bracket and fell hitting the ABM’s right hand and injuring his finger.  The ABM was treated at a local 
hospital, placed on work restriction, and returned to work. 
 

 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Several failures contributed to this event. 

•  Rig personnel allowed themselves to be guided by a "classification society" procedure for on-load testing of the lifeboats that did 

not conform to the requirements of the IMO MSC. 1/Circ.1206 issued 26 May 2006. 
The fire extinguisher fitted by life boat manufacturer was located in a position adjacent to the lifeboat coxswain’s seat from where it 
released under dynamic loading and fell hitting an employee. 

•  Although  a JSA  was  conducted  the JSA  was  for  normal  lowering  of  the  boat.    There  was  a  failure  to  conduct  a specific  JSA  to 

identify the dynamic hazards of an "on-load drop test". 
The  retaining  clip  on  the  fire  extinguisher  securing  strap  either  failed  during  the  test  or  prior  to  the  test  (unknown)  allowing  fire 
extinguisher to release. 
The  lifeboat  was  not  partially  immersed  in  the  water  to  reduce  the  dynamic  effects  as  per  the  IMO  operational  work  instruction.  
The classification society instruction stated "just clear of the water.” 
The lifeboat was released from 1/2m to 1m (1.6 feet to 3.3 feet) out of the water; thus, increasing the effects of the impact. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

The company notified the manufacturer of the event in relation to the location of fire extinguisher.  
The company is taking steps to ensure that any items that may be effected to dynamic loading are properly secured prior to testing. 
The company initiated improved scrutiny of periodic checks on lifesaving and emergency appliances. 

• 
• 
• 
•  All rigs are to ensure that any and all third party vendors provide a work instruction, risk assessment and JSA for any proposed 

activity; and must utilize permit to work and risk assessment to review and control the proposed activity. 

•  All rig managers are to ensure that proposed activity is conducted as per the work instruction and are required to stop the operation 

if the work scope deviates from the designated work instruction. 

•  All rig managers were reminded not to allow third-party personnel, even class surveyors, to perform operations without strict 

adherence to the company’s safety management system or IMO instruction, and that they must maintain a firm system of control 
over all activities onboard. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2013 

