Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 37 
 

MAN-RIDING INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  inexperienced  Floorhand  was  assigned  to  obtain  a  measurement  from  the  bottom  of  the  rig  floor  to  the 
Texas  deck.    A  man-rider  permit  was  obtained  for  the  task,  a  pre-job  meeting  was  held  and  the  job  was 
discussed.  A man-rider JSA was on site and available.  Another Floorhand was assigned to operate the man-
rider  winch  for  the  Elevator  Basket.    The  man-rider  winch  operator  was  able  to  see  the  man  in  the  elevator 
basket while being lowered but there were some restrictions.  A flagman was assigned, but left the work site to 
retrieve a measuring tape for the task.  The injured person put on his safety gear, PFD and fall protection but 
the  crew  did not  wait  for  the  return  of  the  flagman (banksman)  prior  to  the  man  being  lowered  to  the Texas 
deck.  The injured man stated “he had to push himself away from some of the congested area an as he began 
to push away he apparently got his right ring finger between the lifting frame for the BOPs and the man-rider 
elevator basket.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  No specific JSA was written for this task.  The crew used the general man-riding JSA instead. 
2.  A  specific  JSA  should  have  been  created  and  discussed  in  the  safety  meeting  held  with  all  personnel 

involved prior to the task beginning.   

3.  The inexperienced floorhand decided to proceed prior to the other personnel returning to the job site with 

the proper tools (the measuring tape) to complete the task. 

4.  The winch operator, a more experienced Floorhand, decided to continue with the task without a flagman 

(banksman). 

5.  The winch operator did not have a clear view of the man rider all the way to the Texas deck. 
6.  The injured person failed to follow directions and to utilize proper hand placement during this task. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives and 
action items: 
 
Directives 
 
1.  Personnel shall be reminded of their accountability for not following directions, policy and procedures. 
2.  Create a specific JSA for the elevator man-riding basket. 
3.  Discuss the incident with all personnel during the safety meetings. 
 
Action Items 
 
1.  Construct a stairwell to be used from the main deck to the Texas deck. 
2.  Add weighted guides on the corner of the elevator man rider basket. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2003 

