Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 04 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

FALL FROM MONKEY BOARD RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

The Assistant Driller (AD) had gone to the Monkeyboard via the Derrick ladder to assist the Derrickman to 
raise a work platform that the Derrickman could not lift completely vertical.  The work platform was located on 
top of the segment of fingers on the Driller’s side.  At the time of the incident the rig was pulling out of the 
hole in preparation to run 10¾ casing.  The platform needed to be raised so they could rack back the last 37 
stands on that side making more room on the rig floor to run casing.  95 stands were already racked back on 
the off drillers side.  
 
Once at the Monkey Board the Assistant Driller proceeded to the work platform, the Derrickman tended to his 
lines for the drill pipe rack in the off Driller’s side.  Approximately 10 minutes later the Assistant Driller called 
for the Derrickman to help him raise the platform.  The Assistant Driller was in the middle of the fingers when 
the Derrickman positioned his left foot on the rear Monkey Board beam and his right foot on the fingers to lift 
the  platform.    The  Assistant  Driller  had  apparently  managed  to  remove  both  pins  from  the  platform  which 
also held the fingers.  This allowed the platform to be dislodged.  When the segment of fingers and platform 
gave way and the Derrickman and the AD fell.  The Derrickman was wearing a fall restraint, which stopped 
his fall under the Monkey Board.  The AD died after he fell approximately 85 feet to the rig floor. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Although still under investigation, the initial investigation has revealed that. 

-  The deceased was wearing a full harness but was not attached to any form of fall arrest or restraint. 
-  The Monkeyboard was fitted with a fall arrestor, which was being used by the Derrickman.  There was no 

other fall arrestor available for use. 

-  The work platform could not be raised to the full vertical position because the backside of the pad eyes 
fitted to the platform came into contact with the Monkey board-supporting beam when the platform was 
raised to about a 45 deg angle. 

-  The work platform had recently been modified when new fingers were fabricated and fitted. 
-  The two pins holding the walk platform also supported the segment of fingers.  It is possible that when 
looking from above, the pins were viewed as being for the platform only with the fingers being part of the 
main Monkeyboard structure.  This pin set up is as per original manufacture design. 
-  It appears the Assistant Driller removed both pins in an attempt to raise the platform. 
-  It appears the Derrickman who was securing the drill pipe rack in the off Driller’s side was called in to 
help  by  the  Assistant  Driller  to  raise  the  platform  and  may  have  unbalanced  the  unpinned  fingers  and 
platform causing them to fall. 

-  The Assistant Driller was on the Monkey Board for approximately 15 minutes but at no stage was the 

deceased told to attach a fall restraint. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following Learning/Corrective 
Actions so far: 

-  Constant  reinforcement  stressing  the  importance  of  wearing  the  correct  PPE  and  fall  protection  at 

heights. 

covered by adequate controls. 

-  Constant reinforcement that all employees have the right to intervene or stop the job if it is not safe or 

-  Review all Monkey Board operations on all company rigs. 
-  Ensure all company rigs are fitted with a secondary fall arrestor system on the Monkey Board. 
-  Develop  procedures  indicating  all  modifications  are  to  be  approved  and  tested  prior  to  being  put  back 

into service. 

-  Review pin set up so that pins cannot be inadvertently removed. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

 

 

View showing that one 
pin held both the grating 
and the finger assembly. 
 

Side view of grating and Fingers attachment.  Re-enactment of backside of pad eye rubbing 

at 45 deg angle.  Actual restriction was on 

Monkey board beam. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2005 

