Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 02 – 39  
 

DRILL PIPE HANDLING OPERATIONS RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
When laying down 5” drill pipe, the Derrickman was operating the rig floor winch lowering a joint to the catwalk.  
He stopped lowering the joint when he saw a co-worker walking on the Catwalk towards the V-Door.  The co-
worker was bringing a drum with drill pipe pin protectors that were to be picked up to the rig floor.  
 
When the co-worker got next to the hanging joint on the winch line, he pushed the joint of drill pipe aside, thus 
causing the drill pipe pin end to fall off the Catwalk.  When the pin end fell off the catwalk, the joint of drill pipe 
struck the injured worker on the right shoulder. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  investigation  revealed  that  established  working  procedures  were  not  followed  which  also  reflects  poor 
supervision.    Improper  work  position  for  the  Injured  Person  indicates  that  there  was  also  a  lack  of  safety 
awareness among crew members.  The air winch operator should have been more alert and warned the co-
worker.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Rig supervisors and personnel were instructed to:   
 
•  Follow  the  established  company  procedures  in  order  to  avoid  placing  crew  members  under  unsafe 

working conditions. 

 
•  There must be a competent operator on the air winch all the working time. 
 
•  Supervisors are responsible for correcting unsafe acts and to stop the job when deemed unsafe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC  Note:    Reference  IADC  Accident  Prevention  Reference  Guide  Section  3.7  and  Section  3.14.    Also 
reference Safety Alerts 01-03 and 99-08. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued September 2002 

