Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 26  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

LAYING DOWN CUT-OFF CASING JOINT RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

A  5m cut-off joint  of  9  5/8"  casing  was  suspended  in  a  set  of  150  ton  third  party  elevators.    The  cut-off  end 
rested in front of the drawworks with the blocks raised and the elevator latch was facing the drawworks while 
the mouse hole and conductor barrel were being removed.  The Driller called a crewmember to the rig floor to 
assist in laying down the cut-off joint of casing onto the catwalk. 

As  the  Driller  raised  the  blocks  so  the  cut-off  end  cleared  the  rotary  table,  the  crewman  pushed  the  joint  of 
casing towards the V-door.  As the joint was pushed toward the V-door and the blocks were being lowered to 
the  rig  floor,  the  elevator  door  opened  and  the  joint  of  casing  fell  to  the  rig  floor.    The  worker  was  knocked 
down to the floor.  Emergency response procedures were immediately initiated and emergency support arrived 
on location shortly after the incident.  The worker later died from his injuries. 

PICTURE OF THIRD PARTY ELEVATOR 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The sub contractor's 150 ton side door elevators were 
certified  but  did  not  have  the  manufacturer's  Safety 
Latch  Lock  Pin  in  place.    The  manufacturer  requires 
the  use  of  a  safety  latch  lock  pin  on  all  side  door 
elevators  to  ensure  the  elevator  is  closed  properly 
and  cannot  open.    This  incident  and  past  incident 
history  involving  this  style  of  elevator  indicates  that 
this safety latch lock pin is critical in ensuring that the 
elevator door is properly closed and secure. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following action items: 

 

•  Prior to the elevator being used for the operation, the supervisor must inspect the elevator to ensure that 

•  The elevator must also be function tested to ensure that the door latch, spring and safety latch locking pin 

the safety latch lock pin is in place.   

operate properly.  

•  The inspection can be incorporated into the pre-job safety meeting prior to the commencement of the task. 
• 
If the safety latch lock pin is not in place the elevator must not be used.  The safety latch lock pin 
is the secondary method ensuring the elevator is closed properly. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2003 

