Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 36 
 

TRAVELING BLOCK HITS CROWN  
RESULTING IN A FATAL INCIDENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  elevators  were  at  the  monkey  board  and  the 
Derrickman had just latched the stand of pipe.  The relief 
driller  shifted  into  gear  and  picked  up  the  stand.    The 
traveling  block  hit  the  crown  and  the  drilling  line  parted 
resulting  in  the  traveling  block  with  stand  of  pipe  falling 
across the monkey board.  The Derrickman was struck by 
the falling equipment and was killed.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
• 

Inspection records indicated proper functioning of the 
crown saver device but the safety margin for setting 
the crown saver device did not allow for enough 
distance to stop the blocks from striking the crown. 

•  The drawworks was put in highest gear, not allowing 

sufficient control of traveling block. 

•  The selection of the relief driller was not done 

according to company procedures. 

 

 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig personnel are to comply with all procedures.  If it is not possible to comply, stop the job, contact the 

• 

Operations Manager. 
In the event procedures cannot be complied with immediately, it becomes the responsibility of the 
Managers, Supervisors, and Safety Supervisors to stop the job, review and modify the standards and 
procedures as needed to complete the job while ensuring safety. 

•  To assure personnel competency, personnel qualifications for all positions both permanent and relief 

should be verified with the area Human Resources department.   

•  Supervisors are to ensure that company procedures are followed regarding relief employees. 
•  Drillers are to ensure that the crown saver device is set in the correct place so there is sufficient stopping 

distance to the crown. 

•  Drillers are to test the crown saver device system as per company procedures. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2008 

