Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 43 
 

DIVERTER EQUIPMENT – HIGH POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A Drilling Contractor in the Gulf of Mexico reports that subsequent to cementing surface casing using a jack up 
MODU, annular flow was reported to rig management.  The integral diverter system that had been installed on 
the rig was placed in the “test” mode and the well was shut in to give time for the cement to set up. (The “test” 
mode is normally used to test the diverter system, after installation, in accordance with MMS requirements.)  
When pressures rose, the diverter flow line seals started leaking gas to the rig floor.  Personnel evacuated the 
area  and  an  attempt  was  made  to  divert  the  well  from  the  remote  station.    Due  to  the  configuration  of  the 
control system placed previously in the “test” mode on the rig floor, the remote would not operate the desired 
diverter functions.  There were no injuries or environmental impacts due to this incident, however there were 
high potential consequences. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Subsequent investigations determined that there was a general lack of knowledge of the complete capabilities 
and limitations of the integral type diverter system:   
 
1.  Flow line seal pressure could have been increased to stop the gas leak and;  
 
2.  The  diverter  could  have  been  closed  in,  after  a  time  delay,  had  the  “test”  valve  been  left  in  the  normal 
mode.  With the “test” valve in the normal mode, operations from the remote panel would have worked as 
designed. 

 
Additionally, further investigations revealed that there are several types of approved diverter systems in use in 
the Gulf of Mexico with control systems of varying complexities, which meet all of the current regulations.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following to operations 
personnel: 
 
•  Rig  Management  and  drill  crews  should  be  trained  and  competent  in  the  installation,  use,  testing  and 

maintenance of the diverter system installed on their particular assigned rig. 

 
•  Up to date drawings, manuals and technical information should be available on the rig for reference and 

training purposes. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2003 

