Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 30  
 

CASING THREAD PROTECTOR DROPPED DURING HI-LINE OPERATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Having already transferred 40 joints of casing with the Hi-line from the Drill Floor to the Main Deck, 
another single joint of casing was in the process of being transferred to the Main Deck.   
While being transferred, the thread protector (900 grams) for the pin end of the joint came loose and 
dropped onto two cutting skips located 3 meters below.  No personnel were in the vicinity of the area 
when the drop occurred. 
 

 

 

 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  Lack  of  attention  by  the  person  in  charge  of  installing  the  casing  thread  protector  and  lack  of 
supervision  by  the  supervisor.    The  Installer  did  not  ensure  that  the  thread  protector  was  properly 
fitted and the supervisor failed to follow-up.  

•  Procedure OMM-3-STD-062 “Casing Procedures”, does not give the proper procedure / safety check 

•  The  JHA  did  not  state  the  need  to  inspect  the  casing  thread  protectors  to  ensure  that  they  were 

for installing thread protectors. 

properly installed. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  Revision of the Casing  Procedures (OMM-3-STD-062) under section 4.1 ‘Safety  Considerations’ to 
state, “To avoid dropped objects, the pin / cap thread protector must be tightened correctly to avoid 
dropped  objects  anytime  that  casing  is  hoisted.    Ensure  that  all  threads  are  made  up  and  that  the 
correct size pin / cap thread protectors are being used.” 

•  Supervisors  and  Hi-line  Operators  are  to  double  check  that  the  cap  /  pin  thread  protector  are 

properly tightened / secured. This is to be highlighted on the JHA Worksheet HSM-2-JHA-023. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

be applied to their own situations and practices 

Issued November 2014 

