Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 29  
 

ELECTROSTATIC CHARGE RESULTS IN METHANOL TANK EXPLOSION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A worker was climbing to the top of a 500 gallon (1,893 liter), polyethylene methanol storage tank to check 
the fluid level.  When the worker reached the top of the tank, he touched the cap on the inner tank with his 
hand  and the flammable vapor around  the cap ignited resulting in  an  explosion and flash fire.  The  worker 
received first aid for a second degree burn to his arm. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 
•  The worker had accumulated an electrostatic charge while climbing to the top of the tank. 
•  Flammable methanol/air mixture had developed inside the inner tank or interstitial space. 
• 

It was 18 degrees Celsius (66 degrees Fahrenheit) at the time of the incident and methanol has a flash 
point of 11 degrees Celsius (52 degrees Fahrenheit). 

•  Level inside the tank was low (less than 10 percent of total volume). 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The Safety Department had already evaluated the suitability of plastic tanks for the storage of flammable 
fluids such as methanol, and recommended that the company change out the existing plastic tanks since 
they  are  nonconductive  and  difficult  to  ground.    Also,  as  per  API  RP  2003,  plastic  tanks  are  not 
recommended for the storage of flammable liquids. 

•  The company updated their procedures for tank inspections, maintenance and filling. 
•  The company installed sight glasses and piping on all tanks to allow for fluid level inspection and filling 

from the ground level with a stinger extending to the bottom of the tank to prevent splash filling. 

•  Company  personnel  were  instructed  that  under  no  circumstances  is  climbing  to  the  top  of  a  tank 

•  Personnel were reminded that if it is necessary to open the tank cap, a personal ground strap must be 
worn  in  combination  with  gauntlet  style  gloves  and  that,  if  necessary,  platforms  should  be  provided  to 
stand on. 

permitted. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2012 

