Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

FAILURE TO USE FALL PROTECTION RESULTS IN A FALL 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 29 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two drilling rig workers had completed the installation 
of a valve and flowline to the diverter assembly under 
the  rig  floor.    The  workers  were  in  the  process  of 
retrieving  additional  tools  and  lanyards  that  were 
required  for  the  job  which  was  to  take  the  tugger  off 
flowline and remove lanyards from substructure area.  
To  access  the  lanyards  one  of  the  workers  climbed 
under the flowline.  He was not secured to the ladder 
fall  arrest  system  while  climbing  and  working  at  this 
position.  He then reached for the lanyards and while 
in  the  process  of  tossing  them  to  the  rotary  platform 
he  lost  his  balance.    He  fell  approximately  7  meters 
(23  feet)  to  the  matting.  Fortunately,  he  sustained 
only minor injuries. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
• 

The  crew  did  not  review  or  develop  a  JSA  for 
working at heights on the flowline. 

•  The  worker  did  not  use  a  by-pass  lanyard  to 

ensure he was properly anchored at all times. 

•  The equipment was readily available on the rig. 
•  The  worker’s  actions  and  equipment  selection 
was  not  questioned  by  fellow  workers  who  were 
with him or in the area. 

 

 

 

 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to rig 
personnel: 
 
•  Site management should take a leadership role in the ongoing development of JSA’s through direct 

participation and follow-up. 

•  Conduct pre-tour meetings focusing on operational hazards and safety expectations. 
• 

Increase informal work site inspections by all supervisory staff on site. Provide focused visibility during 
performance of critical operations/tasks to reinforce safe work practices. 
Investigate installing a work platform in the flowline area to facilitate installation and removal of the 
flowline. 

• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2004 

