Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 13 
 

PRESSURE RELEASE AFTER ICE PLUG REMOVAL RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  snubbing  crew  rigged  up  on  location.    Set-up  operations  were  completed  for  the  wellhead  stabilizer, 
snubbing jack, catwalk, pipe racks, pumping unit and primary accumulator.  The crew was in the process of 
installing  the  snubbing  unit  equalizer  line  and  the  pumping  unit  flow  line.    The  snubbing  unit  operator  was 
installing  the  equalizer  crossover  into  the  production  casing  valve.    The  casing  valve  handle  was  in,  what 
was assumed to be, a fully closed position.  The downstream piping assembly was then depressurized and 
removed. 
 
Upon  removal  of  the  downstream  piping,  the  snubbing  operator  noticed  an  ice  build-up  inside  the  casing 
valve.  The snubbing operator sprayed methanol to attempt removal of the blockage, but was not successful.  
The  snubbing  operator  then  used  a  steel  chisel  to  break  up  the  blockage.    At  this  time,  the  snubbing 
supervisor entered the well head area near the affected production casing valve.  When the ice plug within 
the casing valve was removed, a high pressure flow of wellbore gas and fluid was released. 
 
The snubbing operator and crew evacuated the area and gathered at the safety meeting point.  A head count 
revealed that the snubbing supervisor was not present and was still lying in the wellhead area near a crane.  
The  crew  retrieved  the  snubbing  supervisor  and  controlled  the  well  by  fully  closing  the  production  casing 
valve. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Winter temperatures allowed fluid to freeze and form an ice plug within the production casing valve. 
•  When  the  production  casing  valve  was  functioned  to  the  close  position,  it  only  went  six  turns  before  it 
appeared to seat.  The valve was not reopened or reclosed to confirm the starting position of the valve 
and whether the correct number of turns had been achieved to fully close the valve. 

•  When  the  ice  plug  in  the  production  casing  was  discovered,  crew  members  failed  to  report  the  out-of-

scope condition to the snubbing supervisor/well site supervisor. 

•  The  task  was  not  suspended  and  nor  was  a  pre-job  hazard  assessment  completed  prior  to  attempting 

removal of the ice plug. 

•  Crew members failed to use proper tools or techniques to remove the ice plug from the valve. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company reminded all employees: 

o  To be extremely aware of potential for ice plug/hydrate build-up in piping systems and the associated 

trapped pressure hazards. 

o  When functioning gate-style valves, ensure the number of turns to open/close are known,  and that 

the proper number of turns can be achieved to confirm the valve is closed. 

o  Always assume that an ice plug within a piping system will contain trapped pressure. 
o  When out-of-scope operations are encountered during routine tasks, STOP the task and report the 

condition.  DO NOT PROCEED WITH THE TASK. 

o  To always ensure that a site specific hazard assessment is completed to determine a safe course of 

action and the control measures required to mitigate the out-of-scope conditions. 

 
Credit to: Enform Safety Alert SA-2014-05.  Also see IADC Safety Alert 13-28 for additional information. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2014 

