Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 04 
 

SELF RETRACTING LIFELINE CABLE FAILURE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Safety Drilling Representative was conducting the monthly Self Retracting Lifeline (SRL) inspection and 
was  in  the  process  of  removing  from  service  a  SRL  to  be  returned  to  the  Manufacture  for  re-certification.  
The  inspection  revealed  that  the  SRL  cable  had  parted  at  the  first  cable  crimp,  which  is  located 
approximately 5” from the safety latch. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The 85’ SRL assembly had been in service approximately two years. 
2.  The  SRL  assembly  was  located  in  the  cellar  deck.    The  cellar  deck  is  enclosed,  reducing  weather 

3.  The  SRL  cable  was  not  retracted  into  the  block  housing,  but  was  pulled  out  and  secured  to  a  beam 

4.  The rubber boot protector for the cable crimps may have allowed water and moisture to become trapped, 

exposure. 

located below the SRL assembly. 

resulting in excessive rusting. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 
 

Issued the following directive to all rigs: 

Ensure that Self Retracting Lifeline cables are retracted into the SRL housing when not in use.  A light 
auxiliary cable for retrieval may be attached if this is a positioning issue. 

 
•  Action Item: 
 

Slide the Self Retracting Lifeline rubber boot down the cable to expose the cable and crimp.  Then 
inspect where the cable and crimp meets.  Look for excess rusting and deterioration.  Return the rubber 
boot to original position.  This process must be performed during each monthly inspection. 

 
•  Update all JSAs relating to the use of Self Retracting Lifelines to include the Directive and Action Item.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  See HSE Reference Guide Section 20  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2007 

