Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 03 
 

PIPE FALLS OFF CATWALK RESULTING IN AN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Rig personnel were in the process of laying down 5” DP and the injured person (IP) was working in catwalk 
area attempting to remove lifting caps.  The employee operating the rig floor winch lowered the 5" drill pipe 
down the V-door slide to the catwalk and two nipples were placed under the pipe.  Then the IP started to 
remove the lifting cap from the 5" drill pipe by standing on cat-walk with the drill pipe between his feet.  He 
attempted to turn the lifting cap with his hands, but he failed to realize that he was moving the opposite end 
of the pipe on the rack.  The pin end of the drill pipe fell off the side of the cat-walk causing the box end of 
the pipe to strike the IP legs.  The pipe knocked the IP to the ground and then the pipe fell to the ground 
hitting and breaking his left leg. 
 

1. IP Straddles pipe 

2. IP turns pipe  

 

3. Pipe end rolls to edge 
of cat walk and falls 

 

 

4. Pipe lands on IP. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The  lessons  learned  from  previous  industry  and  company  incidents  involving  lifting  cap  removal  were 

not communicated to the new employee. 

•  The proper procedure was not followed or understood by the injured person (IP).  
•  The IP was new and he was working alone and was not aware of hazards involved.  
•  Lack of training to the new employee by rig supervisors and other crew personnel resulted in the new 

employee (IP) not receiving instruction on the proper way to remove lifting caps.  

•  The supervisor failed to assign the newly hired person with experienced crew member. 
•  The supervisor also failed to inform the IP that he should not work alone. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 

Instructed rig supervisors to use pre-job safety meeting to communicate job plan with hazards to all crew 
members.  

•  Rig supervisors are to implement the company Safety Management System of mentoring.   
•  Newly hired personnel are to be assigned to work with an experienced crew member  
•  All  rig  personnel  are  authorized  to  apply  safety  standards  and  intervene  to  stop  the  task  if  the  work  is 

unsafe.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2009 

