Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 14  
 

Note: See photos. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

IMPROPER PRE-TRIP INSPECTION LEADS TO RUNAWAY TRAILER 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
A tractor trailer was making a left hand turn onto an access road.  The trailer became uncoupled from the tractor resulting 
in  an uncontrolled  decent  down  a  hill.    The trailer  was  then  involved in  a  collision  with a  security  shack located  at  the 
bottom of the hill. 

Failure  to  check/monitor/observe:  Driver  conducted  inadequate  tug  test  &  brake  checks,  however  this  was  not 
adequate.    The  employee  failed  to  verify  that  the  pin/washer  was  flush  against  the  fifth  wheel,  ensuring  a  secure 
lock. 
Failure to identify hazard/risk: Driver failed to identify that cold conditions (-35°C) could affect the functioning of the 
fifth wheel.  Frozen grease and snow build up under the fifth wheel contributed to the decreased function of the fifth 
wheel locking mechanism. 
Lack of knowledge/situational awareness: Units were brought up on a winter road, causing significant snow and ice 
buildup  around  the  fifth  wheel  plate  which  made  the  grease  stiffer  than  normal.    The  driver  was  not  aware  that 
partially locked jaws (i.e. yolk not fully engaged) could still result in a successful tug test. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

 

The  company  reminded  all  drivers  that  physical  checks  alone  are  not  adequate  to  determine  a  solid  coupling, 
particularly with winter conditions and a fully loaded trailer.  
The company instructed all drivers the before initiating a trip and as part of the pre-trip inspection, confirm that: 
o  The pin/washer is flush against the fifth wheel ensuring a secure lock, 
o  There is no gap between the fifth wheel & trailer, 
o 
o  A pull test is performed. 
The company also reminded all employees that the fifth wheel and coupling mechanisms must be fully cleaned and 
cleared of any snow, ice, or debris before trailer engagement. 

Locks are completely closed around kingpin, 

 
Credit to: Enform Safety Alert 09-2014 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2014 

