Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 49 
 

DROPPED BLOCKS INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the rig crew was pulling out of the hole with 5 inch drill pipe (8 stands into trip) to retrieve storm packer, 
the blocks were being lowered to latch onto another stand and pull it out of the hole.  When the driller applied 
the  electric  brake  he  immediately  noticed  that  it  was  not  working.    He  then  applied  the  manual  drawworks 
brakes attempting to stop the blocks.  His efforts slowed but did not stop the blocks from contacting the drill 
pipe in the slips.  The top drive saver sub landed on the drill pipe and the elevators and bails hit the rig floor 
and slid towards the drawworks.  The drilling line continued to spool off of the drawworks drum.  According to 
their training, the floormen had been standing back watching the blocks descend and thus were out of harm’s 
way when the incident occurred.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Fatigue failure of electric brake spline ring which occurred due to improper alignment of auxiliary brake and the 
drawworks shaft.  In addition there were no written procedures requiring proper alignment techniques.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
•  Shut down and secured rig. 
•  Held all crew safety meeting. 
•  Developed plan of action to replace/repair 

damaged equipment and function test 
equipment to ensure fit for service prior to 
start-up. 

•  Conducted research into draw works service 

•  Sent damaged equipment to testing facility to 

history. 

identify failures. 

•  Developed additional inspection criteria based 

on equipment downtime history. 

 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2002 

