Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 48 
 

IMPROPER HOLE COVERING RESULTS IN INJURIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a rig move, it was necessary to remove a 3’ circle section of grating between the shale shakers.  The 
cut  out  piece  of  grating  was  replaced  over  the  opening  by  mistake  and  not  welded  back  in  place.    Several 
hours later a roustabout working on the shaker tank stepped on the piece of grating that had been placed over 
the opening and fell into the tank.  He suffered mild back pain and pain in the right ankle.  This was a First Aid 
Case  but  could  have  been  much  worse.    There  have  been  similar  incidents:    One  when  the  Driller  fell  50’ 
through the rotary table opening while rigging up Kelly, and another when a floorman fell when he stepped on 
a piece of metal plating that had been placed over an open section in the rig floor. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  holes  were  improperly  covered  and  barriers  were  not  put  in  place  warning  personnel  of  the  holes  and 
keeping employees from stepping into them.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
To address this incident, this company issued the following instructions to their rig personnel:   
 
•  Never  leave  holes  in  grating  or  decks  without  covering  them  immediately  or  erecting  a  safety  barrier.    If 
holes in grating or decks are not to be used again, permanent repairs shall be made as soon as possible. 
The safety barrier is to remain in place until the repairs are made. 
If  a  hole  is  made  in  the  deck  or  grating  for  later  use,  it  is  to  be  covered  immediately  with  a  cover  that 
cannot be displaced and / or a safety barrier must be utilized blocking the opening. 

• 

•  Rig Inspections should be  carried out to determine if similar situations exist and all open  holes repaired, 

covered with a secure cover, or barricaded off. 

•  Temporary  barriers  for  openings  large  enough  for  a  person  to  fall  through  or  off  of,  shall  be  built  with 

equivalent strength to the handrail protection that is required for permanent landing. 

•  When applicable, use Fall Protection. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2002 

