Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

NEAR MISS – DERRICKMAN FELL FROM BOARD 

 
ALERT 05 – 22  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

A  near  miss  incident  occurred  on  a  rig  while  the  crew  was  tripping  pipe  into  the  hole.    The  Derrickman 
stepped onto the toe board and the board broke off, allowing the Derrickman to drop.  Fortunately, his safety 
harness and lanyard arrested his fall and he was not injured.  In addition, the safety chain on the toe board 
kept it from falling to the floor below.  Inspection of the toe board revealed a bad weld on the toe board hinge 
had given way, allowing the toe board to collapse. 

Defective weld on the toe board hinge. 
Hinge was not inspected at the start of the job.   

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. 
2. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company shared the following with their rig 
crews: 
 
This incident was significant and emphasizes several areas of discussion: 
 
1. 

Safety  equipment  (Personal  Protective  Equipment  –  PPE):    The  Derrickman  was  wearing  his 
safety harness and was properly tied off with his safety lanyard while working in the Derrick.  All of 
his equipment performed as it was designed, and he was not injured as a result.  The importance of 
being 100% tied off at all time while working in the Derrick can not be overemphasized. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

Equipment  inspection:   The  hinge  weld  on  the  toe  board  was defective  and  “perhaps”  this  could 
have  been  identified  with  closer  inspection.    Remember  always  inspect  the  equipment  you  will  be 
working  with  and  on  each  and  every  tour.    Don’t  trust  your  safety  to  equipment  you  have  not 
inspected.  This inspection also includes your PPE. Always inspect your harness and lanyard before 
you work in an elevated location. 

Safety  chains:    The  safety  chain  on  the  toe  board  worked  as  designed  and  kept  the  board  from 
falling.  Always check the safety chains, cables, etc. on overhead equipment (lights, board fingers, 
etc.) when making routine derrick inspections.  

 
This notice should be posted at all rigs and discussed during each tours regularly scheduled safety meeting.  
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2005 

