 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finger Injury results from BOP Handling 

 

 

       Alert 4-19 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The deck crew was in the process of landing part of the BOP into an open top container in preparation for sea 
fastening and backload to onshore. As part of the BOP was landed onto the flange, three members of the deck 
crew had to line up the tie down bolts through the bottom of the flange. During this step of the task, part of the 
BOP caught the top of the tie down bolt, which in turn was forced down onto the injured persons (IP) right little 
finger causing a small cut.  
 
IP suffered a small cut to their right little finger that required a visit to the medic.  Medical Treatment included the 
application of steri-strip’s and over the counter medication.   
 

   

 

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 
 
Inadequate design - The design of the container being used for back loading requires the use of bolts to secure 
the BOP to the bottom plate.  
Task plan not fit for purpose - The method chosen by the crew to locate the bolts (inserting from below) put the 
team in the line of fire.  
Inadequate change management - When identifying that the nuts were seized onto the bolts, the team should 
have stopped the job and arranged for them to be freed. This would have allowed the bolts to be inserted from 
above.  
Inadequate Procedure - The back-loading work guideline was not detailed enough to instruct the crew to the 
accepted method of locating the bolts.  
People – Hazard Awareness - Control methods identified in the Toolbox talk were not effective. Pinch points 
when locating bolts were identified as a hazard, but the team did not put the control methods in place for the task.  
 

 

 
 

 

LESSONS LEARNED: 
 

 

Back loading work guideline to be reviewed and updated to address correct bolt installation sequence when 
loading BOP.  

Hands Free Picture Book to be updated to include correct bolt installation sequence.  

Re-enforce requirement for pre-use checks to be carried out on all equipment prior to back load.  

Addition of signage/poster inside container to remind crews of the correct bolt installation sequence.   

IP to present incident and learnings at upcoming safety meeting offshore.  

Lessons to be shared with transport container vendors.  

 

 
 

 

 

