Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 03 – 07   
 

DROPPED OBJECT FROM DERRICK – NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While laying down production riser a ½-inch by 4-inch bolt fell from the derrick to the rig floor.  The bolt holds 
the  pulley  section  of  an  air  hoist  sheave  to  the  anchoring  point  which  is  attached  near  the  crown  of  the 
derrick.  Fortunately no one was struck and no injury occurred. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Examination  of  other  sheaves  located  in  the  derrick  revealed  that  all  other  air  hoist  sheaves  had  retaining 
bolts that were loosened by rig vibration, high use, etc.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 

Issued  the  following  statement  to  all  rigs:    “Near 
misses can easily be categorized as near hits.  It 
is  imperative  that  derrick  inspections  are  carried 
out  to  prevent  dropped  object  injuries.    Please 
provide a report to this office detailing where your 
rig  stands  with  relationship 
the  Derrick 
Management System.“  

to 

Instructed  all  rigs  to  immediately  inspect  all 
sheaves  to  determine  that  retaining  bolts  have 
not  loosened  and  that  these  same  bolts  are 
secured by an approved method.   

•  Reminded  all  rig  managers  that  the  Derrick 
Management  System  implementation  schedule 
should be completed as soon as possible.  In the 
meantime,  please  address  this  issue  and  any 
other  derrick  equipment  "dropped  object"  issues 
through regular inspections. 

• 

• 

 

 
Location of dropped bolt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2003 

