Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 05 – 36 
 

IMPROPER USE OF POWER HAND TOOL RESULTS IN INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently an employee was using a hand-held power drill to drill out some built up paint from some boltholes 
on a bracket to be installed.  At the time the employee was wearing all the PPE for the task and the bracket 
had  been  installed  into  a  vice  as  required.    As  the  employee  began  to  drill  out  the  built  up  paint  from  the 
bolthole, the bit jammed on the edge of the bolt hole.  This caused the drill to twist from the employee’s hand, 
resulting in a fracture. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The investigation revealed a number of causes for this incident.  The drill that was being used was size 1/2 
inch.  The description of the drill, which mentioned the size of the drill, was printed in very small lettering on 
the side of the drill.  It was also stamped on the chuck of the drill itself.  This particular drill is supplied with a 
ratchet mounted side handle that allows the handle to be mounted in various positions.  At the time of the 
incident, this handle was not mounted due to being damaged previously.  The drill had not been tagged or 
taken out of service, even though another employee had suffered a similar injury. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig supervisors to: 
 
•  Hold  a  meeting  with  all  personnel  and  discuss  the  operation  and  dangers  of  all  hand  power  tools. 

Discuss the incident with all crewmembers so that all hazards may be defined and eliminated. 

•  Create or revise a JSA on “Usage of Hand Power Tools”. 
•  Look into purchase of a 3/8-inch drill for smaller jobs and use of a drill press or a magnetic drill for larger 

• 

tasks. 
Inspect and ensure that all power hand tools are in good state of repair prior to usage and ensure that 
the Right Tool for the task is utilized. Ensure that all hand drills have the appropriate side handle prior to 
next purchase. Remove any model from service that does not comply. 

 
 
IADC Note:  Please refer to alerts:  98-11, 01-06, 02-36, and 03-35, 05-03 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2005 

