Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 32 
 

MISCOMMUNICATION RESULTS IN A NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was running in hole with 3 ½” cement stinger on 5” drill pipe.  The number of singles to be run were 
calculated  and  laid  out  on  the  pipe  racks.    While  verifying  the  amount,  it  was  realized  that  one  too  many 
joints were on the rack.  The joint was rolled off the rack onto the ground and the Forklift Operator was told to 
remove it.  For some reason, the joint was not moved and the Assistant Driller thought the single had rolled 
off the rack on its own.  The joint was put back on the rack.  The Driller continued RIH and ran into bottom of 
the hole.  The pipe buckled and broke.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  There was an excessive amount of pipe identified and made available on the pipe rack for the task. 
•  The Driller should know the bit depth at all times when getting within 100 feet from hole bottom or target 

depth. 

•  The Driller was not following standard operating procedure in using the equipment properly by running 

slow and closely watching the weight indicator when getting within a few joints of bottom hole. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  Rig  Manager  and  Toolpusher  must  both  ensure  proper  handover  and  discussion  of  operational 

issues with the oncoming crews at tour changes. 

•  Better  supervision  and  instruction  needs  to  be  applied  by  Rig  Manager  and  TP  as  the  crews  are 

inexperienced and still learning.  

•  Although the Driller had been trained to operate the equipment, additional training is needed to ensure 
effective operation of the equipment at specific intervals such as, running pipe close to hole bottom or 
target depth.  Pipe must be run slowly and with close attention paid to the weight indicator in case the 
pipe tally was somehow done incorrectly. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2007 

