Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 19 
 

TONG CLEVIS DETACHES RESULTING IN EMPLOYEE INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The crew was tripping out of the hole when the clevis attaching the back-up snub line to the tongs became 
detached  from  the  tong.    The  tong  swung  around  striking  an  employee  and  he  was  knocked  over  by  the 
tongs and to the rig floor.  The employee only suffered contusions to his legs and body.  Prior to the incident 
the cotter key for the bolt was lost and replaced with a larger “diaper pin” type safety keeper used on derrick 
pins.  During the TOH the keeper was dislodged from the bolt and the nut vibrated off.  The bolt dropped out 
of the clevis and the tongs were then free to swing around the table. 
 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The missing cotter key was replaced with an improper keeper. The replacement keeper was much more 

susceptible to snagging and was apparently pulled out during the TOH.  

2.  The clevis connections were not thoroughly inspected prior to the trip.  Had the nut been tightened the 

bolt may not have come out, even if the keeper were lost.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1. 

Informed rig personnel that when repairing or replacing missing equipment use the proper parts, not 
make-shift items.  

2.  Rig Personnel are to visually inspect tongs on a regular basis, especially prior to tripping pipe. 
3.  Rig managers are to ensure this Safety Alert is reviewed with each crew member.  A pre-tour safety 

meeting is a good opportunity to conduct and document the review. 

4.  Rig Managers are to ensure that this Safety Alert should be posted in the top doghouse with a copy filed 

in the rig Safety Alert book. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2008 

