Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 45 
 

DANGERS OF FOAM SEALANT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently while performing hot work operations an employee suffered exposure to a substance that caused 
severe  irritation  to  his  eyes,  nose  and  lungs.    Upon  investigation  of  this  incident,  and  as  a  result  of 
information contained within the medical diagnosis after treatment, it was determined that the employee was 
likely  to  have  been  exposed  to  hydrogen  cyanide.    It  is  suspected  that  the  exposure  occurred  as  the 
employee performed hot work on metal that had previously been coated with a foam sealant.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Although the foam sealant had been scrapped off the metal prior to the start of the hot work, some residue 
remained, thus allowing a gaseous discharge during the burning process.  In review of the MSDS supplied 
by  the  manufacture  it  was  discovered  that  when  foam  sealant  is  burned,  it  can  give  off  trace  amounts  of 
hydrogen cyanide.  Hydrogen cyanide is toxic to the body at high concentrations of 110 ppm or greater.  In 
lesser concentrations, this chemical can cause irritation of the mucus membranes, throat, eyes and lungs. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to 
rig personnel: 
 
As always, it is vital that we are aware of the dangers of our environment when performing work.  
 
•  The individual should ALWAYS consult the MSDS of all chemicals that arrive, and are in use onboard 

•  The individual should NEVER perform work in the presence of a chemical unless you are familiar with its 

potential effects, and fully understand all of the recommended precautions for use.  

•  All  foam  sealant  should  be  completely  removed  from  metal  by  means  of  buffing,  prior  to  burning  or 

your facility.  

welding operations. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2004 

