Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 10 
 

DROPPED LANDING STRING RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
At  the  time  of  the  event,  the  rig  crew  was  running  upper  completion  on  7  5/8”  VAM®  Top  FE  (Fatigue 
Enhanced) landing string.  The hanger was 87 feet (27 meters) from land off.  Having made up the final full 
joint of landing string, the  string  was  lifted approximately five feet to enable a centralizer to be fitted  8 feet 
(2.4  meters)  back  on  the  previous  joint  and  manual  slips  were  pulled.    When  the  string  was  lifted 
approximately five feet, the latch on the 250 ton side-door elevators failed and the string dropped, with the 
upper tool joint passing through the rotary.   
 
At the time of failure the elevators were positioned +/- 45 feet (14 meters) above the rotary.  There were no 
injuries to personnel. The blocks were then lowered to the deck for a closer inspection. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  A side door type elevator had been used to lift the VAM® TOP FE coupling. 
• 

It  was  discovered  that  the  elevators  primary  latch  mechanism  had  sheared  off.    No  other  parts  were 
missing. 

•  A mechanical failure of the VAM® TOP FE coupling face had occurred. 
•  A  mechanical  failure  of  the  side-door  elevator  latch  had  occurred  due  to  the  VAM®  Top  FE  coupling 

failure. 
Investigations are ongoing and an update will be given in due course. 

• 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Personnel  running  VAM®  TOP  FE  products  were  reminded  that  the  running  recommendations  must  be 
followed.  See the following:   
 
•  Slip type elevators must be used for the running of this product. 
•  Side door elevators should only be used as “single-joint elevators” to lift one joint of pipe at a time. 
•  Any  VAM®  TOP  FE  pipe  strings  previously  run  using  side  door  elevators  should  be  inspected  before 

•  Any  previous  VAM®  TOP  FE  connection  data  sheets  that  may  state  a  “max  load  on  coupling  face” 

use. 

should be disregarded. 

•  Contact VAM® services or the supplier for a new Connection Data Sheet or for further information. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2014 

