Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 26 
 

FLARE LINE PILOT RESULTS IN RESERVE PIT FIRE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While circulating out a well through the gas buster the driller instructed one of the crew to check the diesel pilot 
light at the degasser flare line and make sure it was burning.  The crewman increased the diesel flow into the 
barrel.  While circulating the kick out of the well, the pilot light barrel overflowed spilling burning diesel into the 
reserve pit.  The pit caught fire from residue diesel from oil based mud.  Luckily, the wind was blowing away 
from the rig and the fire burned itself out in 30 minutes, not damaging any equipment.  Even though the crew 
responded well to the emergency, this could have been very costly, in lives.  This incident was a wake up call 
for the rig crews and managers. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
It  is  evident  that  the  crewman  did  not  understand  either  the  communication  or  the  task.    Due  to  this  the 
increased fuel flow to the flare line pilot barrel caused the barrel to over flow and carry the pilot flame to the 
reserve pit.  It was noted that there is no  mention of gas buster or lighting flare line in the Rig Management 
System.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
??

Instructed Drillers  to  take the time to ensure crew members understand the tasks to be performed (JSA 
would help) but even more importantly the driller must ensure that the crew understands instructions given 
to them.  One way is to ask them to repeat back t the instructions  just given to them.   

 
?? One corrective action taken by the rig was to move the gas buster flare line to the other side of the flare 
line runway opposite of the reserve pit.  They also built a dike around the pilot light diesel barrel to prevent 
burning diesel from escaping the area if the barrel overflows. 

 
?? The rig crews held a meeting and discussed the incident, how to correctly do this task, who was assigned 

to do the task from this point on, and what changes in the layout had taken place.  

 
?? Operations Support Group was instructed  to update the Rig Management System to include operation of 

the gas buster and lighting procedures for the flare line pilot flame.    

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2002 

