Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 51 
 

FLASH FLOOD INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The Night Toolpusher was making a midnight crew 
change with a four wheel drive vehicle at a desert  
location.  It had been raining very hard for several hours  
and the crew bus was unable to get to location.  The  
Toolpusher was crossing a spot in the road that had  
been covered by water.  As the vehicle entered the  
water a wall of water picked up the vehicle and floated it 
for approximately 120 ft before coming to a stop.  At this  
time the water level was up to the bottom of the windshield, 
approx 4 1/2 ‘ and running rapidly.  The crew of 5 people 
climbed out the windows and on to the roof  
of the vehicle, radioed for help and waited for the water  
to subside.  After 20 minutes the water subsided and the 
employees made it to safety.  Fortunately no one was injured 
but damage did occur to the vehicle.  Flash 
floods, especially in desert areas, can occur very quickly.  
Flash flooding is the #1 weather related killer around the 
world. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT:   
 
The Night Toolpusher drove into water not knowing the depth or being aware of the potential of a wall of water 
coming down the low area.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company issued the following guidelines:   
 
•  Get out of areas subject to flooding.  This 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Do not camp or park your vehicle along streams 

and washes, particularly during threatening 
conditions.

includes dips, low spots, canyons, washes, etc.  

•  Avoid already flooded and high velocity flow 

areas.  Do not attempt to cross flowing streams.  
If driving, be aware that the road bed may not be 
intact under flood waters.  Turn around and go 
another way. NEVER drive through flooded 
roadways!  
If the vehicle stalls, leave it immediately and seek 
higher ground.  Rapidly rising water may engulf 
the vehicle and its occupants and sweep them 
away.  

•  Be especially cautious at night when it is harder 

to recognize flood dangers.  

• 

• 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2002 

