Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 03 – 32 
 

AIR HOSE INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATAL INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A worker was struck on the head by a compressed air 
hose which blew off its fitting on a piece of equipment. 
He received serious head injuries, which proved fatal. 
 

 
 
 
Anti Whip Device 

 

 
 

 

IADC Note:  This anti-whip device was not part of 
the original alert. 
 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The air hose was held by a hose clamp on the fitting with no keeper or restraining chain or sling to prevent the 
hose from thrashing around.  The primary cause of this accident was the failure to secure the hose and hose 
clamp by means of keeper or sling and chain respectively. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company gave the following instructions to its 
operations personnel  
 
•  Although routine tasks don ’t require a formal written JSA, the destructive potential of “unrestrained 

”compressed air hoses should be highlighted to all personnel and be included in toolbox talks and safety 
training.   

•  Restraining devices such as keepers, chains, slings, proprietary special couplings and whip-checks should 
be installed on all diameter or high-pressure compressed air hoses to prevent them thrashing about in the 
event of a hose or coupling failure.   

•  Regular inspections of all compressed air powered equipment, including hoses, should be carried out to 

assess the integrity of the couplings, clamps, keepers and hoses and corrective action taken where 
necessary. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2003 

