Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 04 
 

LARGE CONTAINER LIFTED BY HELICOPTER DOWNDRAFT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a scheduled helicopter landing, the helicopter’s downdraft caused a large container weighing around 
200 kilograms (440 pounds) to be lifted over handrails and then fall around 10 metres (33 feet) to the deck 
below.  The container had been in place for some months and had experienced several similar helicopter 
landings without incident.  The container was placed on the roof of a structure adjacent to the helipad on 
wooden battens and was not secured.  The container was damaged in the fall.  While no injuries were 
sustained, there was significant potential for serious injury. 
 

Location prior to the incident 

Location after the incident 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The container was placed adjacent to the helipad and 35 metres (115 feet) from the helipad centre.  
The container was mounted on battens, but was not fastened to the structure.  These factors promoted 
the conditions for the rotor wash (air flow created by rotor system) to cause lift and move the container 
to a point where it fell over the handrail to the deck below.  The helicopter in use had a significantly 
greater rotor wash (air flow created by rotor system) than the other helicopter types that visit the rig. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2010 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The container was immediately removed from the location.   
  The container will be replaced and installed with a designed restraint system. 
  Lessons can be learned on the hazards that can be created by placing unsecured items, irrespective of 

their weight, in areas such as helidecks where there is intense airflow. 
o  Even very heavy objects close to helicopter operations can become airborne if not restrained. 
o  Placing objects on battens can allow sufficient air beneath the load to promote lift. 
o  Personnel conducting surveys of areas adjacent to helicopter operations need to consider the 

aerodynamic energy that helicopter arrivals and departures can generate.  (The helicopter down 
draft from the rotor moves roughly enough air to lift 11 tons into the air on takeoff.) 

o  All loose items should be removed from the helicopter landing area and containers or storage 

systems close to helicopter operations should to be secured to a supporting structure.   

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2010 

