Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 36 
 

DROPPED GENERATOR SET 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A 550 KVA generator set was being moved by a crane from a transport barge to the rig by connecting the 
lifting slings to the weatherizing framework.  The frame pulled loose from the skid and the generator fell 15-
20 feet (5 - to the deck destroying the generator set.  Fortunately no one was under the load when it fell.     

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The supervisor of the operation decided to perform the lift after lunch, but the crane operator and deck 

crew went ahead in an attempt to move the generator without the supervisor present.  
  The lifting holes in the skid were burned in the bottom of the skid and not inspected.   
  The barriers our company has erected to manage risk to an acceptable level failed.  A competent person 
should have inspected the equipment and the lift points certified to an industry standard by a competent 
person.   

  Due to the generator lifting points being cut in the bottom of the generator skid, the lifting shackles could 

not fit into the holes.   

  The crew decided to tie onto the winterizing frame which failed during the lift.   
  The frame was not inspected by a competent person for lifting purposes.   
  When faced with a new safety issue, the crew did not STOP the job and review the process.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  The incident was shared with other company rigs and personnel.  All rig supervisors were instructed to 

review the incident in their safety meetings.   

  Rig personnel were instructed that tie-off lifting points are to be inspected by a competent person during 

construction.   

  Personnel involved in lifting operations were instructed that they are to only use lifting points that have 
been certified by a competent person to lift loads.  They were also instructed not use alternative points 
on equipment to lift equipment.  

  Rig crews  were  instructed  that  when  faced  with a new situation  the  crew should  have  stopped  the  job 
and discussed changes (Management of Change) with their supervisor to ensure the job could be done 
safely.   

  People  faced  with  new  safety  concerns  should  STOP  the  job  and  review  the  concerns  with  their 

supervisor.  Each employee has the authority to “STOP” the job, but no one did.   

  All employees were reminded to use the barriers that the company has established to prevent incidents 

and take the lead on safety.   

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2009 

