Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 09 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

IMPROPER RIGGING RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 
During the start-up phase of a drilling program, it was necessary to stand back the diverter assembly on the drill floor.  In 
an attempt to stand back the diverter assembly, the crew attached a snatch-block and sling to a guardrail which was then 
connected to an air-hoist.  When the load was applied from the air-hoist, the guard rail broke free from the deck and flew 
across the drill floor, where it struck the IP in the head, resulting in a fatality. 
 

•  The IP was attempting to re-locate the diverter assembly to an area of the drill floor that was not a standard “stand-
back” area, so anchor points and pad-eyes were not available.  (The area routinely used to stand back the diverter 
assembly is equipped  with fit for purpose anchor points and pad-eyes.)  A new JSA  was not initiated to cover this 
change in the job. 

•  The selection of a guardrail as an anchor point was not consistent with standards and procedures for rigging. 
•  Safe Work Procedures and JSA procedures for this job were not followed. 
•  The IP (supervisor in charge) was reluctant to accept suggestions from subordinates to stop the job. 

ROOT CAUSE: 

 
Failure to identify and assess risks associated  with  work related to handling the diverter assembly and failure to follow 
established procedures for planning such work. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 

•  Communicated details of incident to the fleet and industry 
•  Instructed rig supervisors to ensure that adequate planning and communications are conducted for all tasks. 
•  Communicated employee responsibility to stop work if unsafe. 
•  Reviewed JSA’s and Safe Work Procedures to ensure they are adequate for handling diverter assemblies. 
•  Instituted a program of follow-up training for Safety Leadership and Risk Assessment at all levels. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TTuuggggeerr  LLiinnee  

TTuuggggeerr  LLiinnee  

IP’s Position 

GGuuaarrdd  RRaaiill  

Diverter 

direction of the travel 

TTuuggggeerr  iinn  UUssee  

SSnnaattcchh  BBlloocckk  
ttiieedd  ttoo  bboottttoomm    
ooff  GGuuaarrdd  RRaaiill  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2005 

