Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 02 
  

SAFETY RETRACTING LIFELINE BLOCKS AND ROTATING MACHINERY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Recently, an employee was fatally injured due to interference between his fall protection equipment and the 
rotating  head  atop  the  annular  Blowout  Preventer  (BOP).    Specifically,  the  employee  hooked  the  Safety 
Retracting Lifeline (SRL) to his harness and walked laterally across an elevated catwalk to a location where 
the rotating control device (rotating head) was between the employee and the anchor point of the SRL block.  
This apparently allowed the line to become entangled in the rotating control device (see photograph). 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

On this model of rotating 
control device, the entire 
clamp assembly rotates along 
with the kelly.  SRL line 
apparently became entangled 
in some portion of the clamp 
assembly. 

 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following to rig 
personnel: 
 
1.  Personnel shall maintain a 6 ft (2 meter) radius from the BOPs at all times while the rotary is engaged 
(rotating).    If  maintenance  activities  require  access  to  the  BOPs,  the  rotary  shall  be  disengaged  and 
locked out. 

 
2.  All Rig Managers shall review with crews general precautions regarding the use of SRL blocks.  Special 
emphasis should be placed on directing personnel to not move laterally away from the overhead anchor 
point. 

 
3.  Some models of rotating control devices are designed such that there are no external rotating parts.  Use 
of these devices is encouraged when possible.  If a rotating control device with external rotating parts is 
employed, barricading shall be installed to ensure personnel maintain a safe distance during operation. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2006 

