Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 17 

FINGER INJURY DURING 9 ⅝’’ CASING RUN 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The rig crews were working along with the casing contractor crews to run 9 5/8'' casing into the well.  After 
stabbing in the 20th stand of casing, the injured person (IP) was guiding the tong to the stabbed casing by 
holding onto the right side handle of the power tong.  Unfortunately, the IP's left middle finger was trapped 
between  the  power  tong  handle  and  the  casing  surface  injuring  his  finger  tip  resulting  in  open  wound.    He 
immediately went to the rig clinic where he received first aid treatment and referred to the onshore medical 
clinic  for  further  medical  evaluation  where  he  was  administered  sutures.    X-rays  also  confirmed  that  there 
were no fractures. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  Wrong hand placement 
•  Pre-Job  Safety  Meeting  (PJSM)  was  not  conducted  for  IP’s  crew  upon  resumption  of  shift  before  they 

took over the casing running operations. 

 

 

Power tong handle that 
trapped the IP’s hand 

Two straps in place to use to 
avoid finger injuries 

 

• 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  Discussed this incident with crews during HSE meetings with emphasis on use of safe handling points. 
• 

Instructed supervisors to ensure that Pre-Job Safety Meetings (PJSMs) are conducted and documented 
prior to starting any job and/ or before any additional crew personnel join an existing operation. 
Instructed  supervisors  and  crews  to  ensure  that  available  JSAs  for  required  jobs  are  reviewed  and 
understood by all concerned during PJSM before embarking on any task. 
Instructed  rig  supervisors  that  generic  JSAs  shall  be  reviewed  /  revised  to  incorporate  job  specific 
hazards and precautions. 
Identify  /  nominate  crews  with  appreciable  understanding  of  English  language  to  translate  /  explain  to 
others in local dialects during PJSMs in order to enhance effective communication. 

• 

• 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2011 

