Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

ALERT 04 – 26 
 

FALL PROTECTION DEVICES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The oil and gas industry has recently experienced several incidents involving fall protection devices.  Self Retracting Life 
Lines (SRL) and/or Full Body Harnesses have become entangled on elevators or traveling blocks causing derrick men to 
be pulled down from tubing or monkey boards or as in one case the derrickman was lifted off the monkey board.  Another 
incident occurred when the SRL was attached to the underside of the crown.  The wind caused the line to extend out into 
the top drive rollers.  As the top drive was lowered, the line pulled the derrickman down, but fortunately the line broke and 
the  derrickman  was  still  secured  on  the  derrick  board  by  the  tail  rope  of  his  belly  belt.    All  of  these  incidents  had  the 
potential  of  being  more  severe  than  the  actual  results  of  a  Near  Miss,  Rig  Incident,  For  Record  Only,  or  First  Aid  By 
Professional.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The incidents that have occurred are primarily the result of two leading contributing factors.  These leading factors are the 
improper adjustment of positioning lanyards and/or full body harnesses, mounting location of SRL and the entanglement of 
the SRL line by taller than normal stands.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, companies involved issued the following: 
 
•  Derrickmen  should  adjust  work-positioning  lanyards  to  prevent  entanglement  of  full  body  harnesses  and  SRLs  with 
traveling  blocks  and  elevators.    Different  types  of  elevators  can  be  larger  and  elevator  horns  may  protrude  further, 
exposing  SRL  and  Full  Body  Harnesses  to  possible  entanglement,  therefore,  adjusting  the  positioning  lanyard  is 
critical to assure that derrickmen do not become entangled when different types of elevators are put in use.  Full Body 
Harness  chest  straps  should  be  adjusted  to  a  snug  fit  to  prevent  entanglement  in  elevators.    If  derrick  men  are  not 
able  to  satisfactorily  adjust  positioning  lanyards,  SRLs,  and/or  Full  Body  Harnesses,  then  “STOP”  work  and  request 
Rig Supervisor and/or Drilling Rig Manager to assess the conditions and develop safe guards to mitigate hazards. 

 
•  Operators and drillers should maintain a continuous awareness of where the derrickman’s fall protection devices are 
located with relationship to traveling blocks, elevators and tubing or drill pipe.  They need to be aware to factors that 
can create additional hazards (i.e. elevator sizes, wind conditions, and size/length of tubulars, etc).  When long stands 
are present in the string, the rig operator/driller and derrickman must remain aware of the position of the long stands.  
When  the  long  stands  are  handled,  there  must  be  clear  communication  between  the  driller/operator  and  the 
derrickman  to  ensure  that  the  speed  of  the  traveling  block  is  reduced  to  allow  the  derrickman  to  exercise  additional 
caution.    The  derrickman  must  be  aware  of  the  potential  for  long  stands  to  snag  or  tangle  with  the  SRL  line  and 
maintain proper positioning on the board to prevent this.  The rig operator/driller should use a stop and latch process 
for long stands to allow the derrickman to confirm that his SRL line has not become snagged or entangled. 

•  Rig Supervisors and Drilling Rig Managers are to review the company Fall Protection Program including appropriate 
use, safe guards, inspection and maintenance fall protection devices with all employees.  Operators and Drillers need 
to be reminded of the many associated hazards that confront derrickmen.  Operators and Drillers are expected to take 
necessary safe guards to mitigate any hazard.   

Full  Body  Harness  and  SRL  information  is  provided  by  the  Original  Equipment  Manufacture  (OEM)  at  the  time  of 
purchase and should be kept for future reference.  If the OEM fall protection device information is not readily available, 
contact your safety field representative and request that they acquire the information. 

 

 
• 

 
 
IADC Note:  See Alerts 98-25, 01-09, 04-04,  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2004 

