Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 12 
 

FALL FROM HEIGHT RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two roughnecks were working in BOP area to reposition the telescopic bell nipple.  After working on the bell 
nipple, the Supervisor sent the winch line down through the rotary table opening.  While the injured person 
(IP)  was  standing  on  the  rotary  beams  he  attached  himself  to  the  winch  line  hook  and  then  unhooked  his 
lanyard  from  the  rotary  table  beams.    As  he  disconnected  his  lanyard,  the  chest  ring  on  his  fall  protection 
harness slipped out of the winch line hook causing the IP to be without fall protection which resulted in him 
falling 10-15 feet to the annular then another 15 feet to where he landed on his back over the BOP rams and 
eventually coming to rest on the ground near BOP hoses.  The Rig’s Emergency Response Team stabilized 
the IP and he was transported to a local hospital for evaluation and treatment then transported to a hospital 
trauma facility.  The medical assessment showed multiple fractures of the pelvis and back.   
 

 

Place where he fell on his 
feet and then on his back 
on the BOP ram bonnet. 

Hook that was in 
unsafe condition 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The crew used a hook which was in unsafe condition.  
•  Rig did not have in place the self retracting lifelines (SRL) for working at height in substructure/BOP 

 

•  The winch used was not adequate for the activity. A Man-Rider Winch should have been used as 

required by standard operating procedure.  

•  The rig had scaffolding available for working on the BOP, but it was not installed due to nature of work 

area.  

being performed. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
•  The unsafe hook had been identified earlier, but had not been replaced as per established procedure. 
•  No JSA or Permit to Work was issued to perform the activity and all potential hazards had not been 

identified for this task. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Immediate action: Instructed the Rig Manager to change out the unsafe hook as soon as the mast is rigged 
down. 
 
•  Per the company’s equipment standard, a request was made to place a dedicated man-rider winch for 

the rig. 

•  Rig personnel are to use fall protection as per company standard for personnel hoisting activities. 
•  Rig personnel installed SRLs below rotary table that are adequate for the job. 
•  Rig personnel were instructed that scaffolding will be erected when working in BOP area. 
•  A third party investigation has been completed. 
•  An inspection has been conducted of all lifting and fall protection equipment on the rig.  A follow-up on its 

condition has warranted several lifting equipment items to be taken out of service. 

•  Rig supervisory personnel were instructed to reinforce company policies on following the correct safety 

procedures such as, JSAs, Work Permits and use of Fall Protection Systems. 

•  Hand-over  notes  and  responsibilities  should  be  identified  by  supervision  and  communicated  to  all 

personnel.  

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

