Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 24  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

THREE INSTANCES OF UNCONTROLLED DESCENT OF THE TRAVELING BLOCK ASSEMBLY 

First Event:   
During  troubleshooting  of a Drawworks  brake  alarm  there was an uncontrolled descent  of the travelling block  assembly  to the rig 
floor resulting  in equipment  damage: 
• 

The maintenance  team  was troubleshooting  the Drawworks  system  for a brake status alarm  that was preventing  the top 
drive from breaking  the upper  connection.    The initial understanding  within  the maintenance  team  was that the 
Drawworks  brakes  were set. 
Throughout  the troubleshooting  the maintenance  team did not seek a clear understanding  as to the condition  of the brakes.   
This was further  compounded  by a Public  Address  announcement, which occurred  during  a critical  phone  call that resulted  in 
the ongoing still believing that the brakes  were set.  As a direct  consequence  o f   t h o s e   e v e n t s ,   both drives  were reset 
under  the faulty assumption  that the parking  brakes  were set. 

• 

•  With no drives holding  the load, and none of the brake  calipers  set, the travelling assembly  descended  to the floor. 
 

Second  Event: 
During  troubleshooting  of a Drawworks  brake  alarm  a few days after recovering from the first event,  there  was an uncontrolled 
descent  resulting  in the travelling  b l o c k   assembly lowering  7 feet (2.1 meters) until it was freely  supported  by the drill string.   
Th i s   r es ul t ed   in   no damage  to equipment: 
•  After receiving  a brake  status  alarm  the emergency  hydraulic  dump  was triggered  on the Drawworks  in order  to ensure  that 

• 

the brakes  were set.  The Drawworks  was then switched  ‘OFF’ as part of troubleshooting. 
The hydraulic  dump  was reset and the Drawworks  was switched  ‘ON’ as part of ongoing  troubleshooting.   At this time the 
auxiliaries  came online  and almost  immediately all brake calipers  opened. 

•  Since  the drives  had not been commanded  by the system  to take the load from the brakes,  and all brake calipers  were 

open, the travelling  b l o c k   assembly  descended.    The emergency  dump  was triggered  by the Driller  from the doghouse.    
H o w e v e r ,   but by that time the travelling  b l o c k   assembly  had already descended  7 feet (2.1 meters) and was freely 
supported  by the drill string. 

[Following  the second  event  it was discovered  that all brake  calipers  were held open due to sticking of all hydraulic  solenoid 
valves  that provide  pilot pressure  to the brake  calipers;  this same situation is what triggered  the brake  alarm  during  the first 
event.    It was also learned  that the solenoids  only stick in the open position  after an extended  period  of being energized  in the 
open position;  hence  the reason  this condition  was not replicated  during  extensive  commissioning  following  the first event] 

Third  Event:   
During  troubleshooting  of excessive  heat buildup  in the Drawworks  braking  system there  was an uncontrolled  descent  resulting 
in the travelling  b l o c k   assembly  lowering  20 feet (6 meters).  This resulted in no damage  to equipment: 
•  After identifying  excessive  heat buildup  in the Drawworks  braking  system  a Permit  to Work was made  out to place the brake 

hydraulic  pumps  into manual  mode  in order  to perform some non-intrusive  troubleshooting.  Operations  on the Drawworks 
were not suspended at this time.  However  the brakes  were set thru the Drillers  chair and the load was fully supported  on the 
brakes. 

•  Non-intrusive  troubleshooting  was allowed  to escalate  into intrusive troubleshooting  without  the knowledge  of the Drill 

Crew. 

•  As part of intrusive  troubleshooting  plugs  were installed  on a section  of vent pipework.  This vent was connected  through  a 
manifold  to all brake control solenoids.    Due to natural internal  fluid bypass  of the spool  within  each of the solenoid  valves, 
pressure  was allowed  to build up behind  the plugs  and all brake calipers  opened. 

•  Since  the drives  had not been commanded  by the system  to take the load from the brakes  when  the brakes  opened,  the 

travelling  assembly  descended.    The emergency hydraulic  dump  was triggered  but by that time the travelling  assembly  had 
already descended  20 feet (6 meters) with a hanging  load of 470 kips. 

[Following  the third event  it was discovered  that the overheating  was primarily  due to a hydraulic pump  that was initially 
installed,  and then run for a short time, with the supply/discharge  ports reversed.    The pump  was changed  out following  the 
second  event.    This plumbing  error was identified  and corrected  after approximately  5 minutes  of run time.  However  the pump 
had already sustained  damage  that directly  led to it heating  up the fluid in the brake system  hydraulic circuit] 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  Drawworks brakes were not set when troubleshooting of Drawworks drives was initiated 
•  Miscommunication of the Drawworks brakes status between the Drawworks operator and maintenance team prior to the reset of 

 

 

 

•  All solenoid operated hydraulic valves that control the position of the Drawworks brake calipers were stuck in the ‘brake release’ 

both Master Drawworks drives 

position 

•  Variations in levels of understanding around Drawworks operation / troubleshooting 

Failure to follow the conditions of the Permit to Work in place 
Less than adequate leadership and supervision 
Lessons learned not effectively shared 

• 
• 
• 
•  Critical Safety Process value not understood by crew 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  Use of control of work practices and procedures to ensure suspended loads are secured during troubleshooting of drives and PLCs 

will prevent similar reoccurrence. 
Instructed personnel that software systems should not be reset without verification that the equipment is mechanically secured. 

• 
•  Replaced all OEM supplied solenoid valves and other components with new valves (of a different design), and flushed the system 

• 
• 

with a lighter viscosity oil. 
Trained crews and verified competency for operation, maintenance, alarm management and response for rig-specific equipment. 
Instructed rig and maintenance supervisors to ensure Critical Alarm Management Process is fully implemented, thereby ensuring 
that adequate controls are in place when responding to alarms. 

•  Established a Barrier Management approach during troubleshooting of critical systems. 
• 

Trained  crews  on  importance  and  use  of  the  Critical  Safety  Processes  such  as:  Permit  to  Work,  Energy  Isolations,  Stop  Work 
Authority, Management of Change and Behavior based safety tools. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect 

the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

their own situations and practices 

Issued August 2014 

