Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 01  
 

DERRICKMAN FALLS ACROSS DERRICK 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig had been circulating off bottom and was about to trip back to bottom.  While the driller was setting 
back the Kelly and the crew was preparing for tripping operations, the derrickman went to the derrick board 
and  connected  his  Safety  Retracting  Lifeline,  but  failed  to  connect  his  tail  lanyard.    When  the  derrickman 
attempted to latch the elevators he realized that he had not attached his lanyard.  He grasped the elevator 
horns and was lifted off the board.  As the elevators cleared the stand, he warped his legs around the stand 
and rode it across the derrick.  He was able to grasp the bridle line and get himself on a derrick beam and 
then back onto the derrick ladder.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. 
2. 

Derrickman failed to connect his tail lanyard. 
The driller did not follow company policy that required that he check with the derrickman to ensure 
that the derrickman was completely tied off before he raised the elevators to the derrick board. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1. 

Toolpushers  were  instructed  to  hold  and  document  safety  meetings  with  all  crew  members  on  the 
company 100% tie-off policy.   
Company  safety  personnel  are  to  visit  all  rigs  and  perform  practical  fall  protection  training  with  all 
personnel,  and  to  leave  training  materials  with  toolpushers  for  training  new  personnel.    Safety 
department is to develop annual training  
All  drillers  were  informed  that  they  are  responsible  to  ensure  that  this  training  is  carried  out  for  all 
new personnel.   
Drillers  and  derrickmen  were  instructed  to  develop  a  communication  tool  to  ensure  that  the 
derrickman is fully tied off.  For example, once the derrickman is fully tied off, he can come to the end 
of the board and turn sideways with his hand on the tail rope and give the thumbs up sign.  Then the 
derrickman is to put one hand on the SRL attachment and give the thumbs up signal with the other 
hand.   
All rig floor personnel were instructed to check that the derrickman has connected his SRL and tail 
lanyard.   
Company  Safety  Representatives  and  Drilling  Superintendents  were  instructed  to  inspect  every 
derrick  to  ensure  that  SRL  and  tail  lanyards  were  installed  properly.    They  were  also  instructed  to 
inform all employees not to move or remove any fall protection devices from the derrick.   
Issued the following policy:  The derrick climber is to be used for for climbing to the derrick board 
where the derrickman is to attach his derrick SRL before disconnecting from the climber device.  He 
is then move to the back of the derrickboard and connect his tail rope.  Once this is completed, he is 
to signal the driller that he is 100% connected.  Tripping into the hole:  The blocks are not to leave 
the floor until the driller knows without a doubt that the derrickman is tied off with his tail rope and 
SRL.  Tripping out of the hole:  There are times when the pipe must be kept moving. Realizing this, 
it  is  company  policy  that  the  pipe  can  be  moved,  but  the  blocks  should  preferably  never  pass  the 
derrick  board  until  the  driller  clearly  knows  that  the  derrickman  is  properly  tied  off  and  his  SRL  is 
attached.    The  driller  shall  never  set  the  slips  to  break  a  connection  until  the  driller  clearly 
knows  that  the  derrickman  is  100%  tied  off.    Note:    Steps  shall  be  repeated  when  stopping  to 
break circulation or change of action (personnel) has taken place. 

 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2007 

