Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

LIFTING OPERATION RESULTS IN ARM INJURY (LTI) 

AD left arm 
was caught 
here. 

 
 
ALERT 09 – 26 
 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After nippling up the BOP stack the crew was installing the 
flow  line  from  the  shale  shaker.    The  assistant  driller  (IP) 
was standing above annular preventer trying to connect the 
flow  line’s  dresser  sleeve  with  the  bell  nipple.    He  was 
holding  the  dresser  sleeve  with  his  left  arm.    The  flow  line 
was being lifted by the carrier hydraulic hoist, which created 
a blind lift.  When he requested that the flow line be lowered 
a little, the night pusher ordered a new floor man to operate 
the  carrier’s  hydraulic  hoist  instead  of  asking  the  driller  to 
operate it.  The new floor man operated the hydraulic hoist 
excessively upwards, which squeezed the assistant driller’s 
left arm between the dresser sleeve and the beam located 
above the sleeve, causing a compound fracture to his arm. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Using  carrier  hydraulic  hoist  to  lift  the  flow  line  instead 

of using the crane. 

2.  The injured person was in an improper working position 

and there was a failure to identify job hazards (JSA). 

3.  The company’s “Hoist 3” men operation system was not 
implemented  and/or  discussed  (Quality  of  Pre-Job 
Safety Meeting). 
Inadequate leadership as new and/or untrained person 
was assigned to operate the hoist. 
5.  JSA for the job was not adequate. 
 

4. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this 
company did the following: 
 
1. 

Instructed  the  rig  crew  to  use  a  crane  when  lifting  the 
flow line instead of using the carrier’s hydraulic hoist. 
Implement  the  company’s  “Hoist  3”  men  operation 
system when using air hoist and/or man riding. 

2. 

3.  Supervisors  were  instructed  to  assign  duties  based  on 

competency. 

4.  Rig crews and rig supervisors were instructed to initiate 
(develop) a correct SJA (JSA) to cover nipple up, nipple 
down BOP and install flow line.  This new SJA (JSA) is 
to be communicated with all drilling crews. 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2009 

 

