Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

ALERT 04 – 24 
 

HAZARDS USING PORTABLE POWERED TOOLS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
There have been at least two instances recently where portable powered grinders or cutting wheels have been 
found in use on company sites without guards fitted.  Operating these tools and saws without proper guarding 
is  a  breach  of  regulations on  Guarding of  Portable  Powered  Tools.    Operating  these  tools without  guards  is 
also an extremely hazardous act, which has resulted in death and serious injury on numerous occasions within 
the Oil and Gas Industry.  
 
By way of example: 
 
•  Recently  a  welder  suffered  a  laceration  to  the  arm  requiring  stitches  after  loosing  control  of  a  9-inch 
grinder when the pipe being cut apparently pinched the unguarded cutting blade.  The tool was being used 
to cut a 6-inch pipe located in a bell hole.  The incident could easily have resulted in an amputated arm.  
Quick thinking on the part of the injured worker during the incident prevented a co-worker standing nearby 
from also being seriously injured by the out-of-control grinder. 

•  An  air-powered  angle  grinder  was  being  used  to  cut  grooves  into  cast  iron  with  a  cut-off  wheel.    The 
unguarded cut-off wheel fractured during use and a large fragment of the wheel went through the worker's 
face shield and into the worker’s face.  The worker died as a result of the injury. 

•  Similarly,  a  welder  using  an  unguarded  electric  powered  6-inch  cutting  disk  was  fatally  injured  when  an 
incorrect  disc  was  in  use and  the  disc fractured causing  a piece of  the  disc  to  strike  his  face killing  him 
instantly. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Lack of proper guarding and in one case the use of an improper disk.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company gave the following instructions to 
their personnel: 
 
(cid:131)  Never use a powered tool unless you are competent in its use. 
(cid:131)  Never use a grinding/cutting tool without its guard in place. 
(cid:131)  Always secure the work piece so that it can’t move during the task. 
(cid:131)  There are hundreds of different types of wheels and discs – make sure the correct one is used for the task. 

The RPM of the machine must not exceed the RPM of the wheel/disc (and the peripheral speed of the 
disc), and the wheel bore and machine arbors must match.  

(cid:131)  Never use a cutting-off wheel for grinding – the sideways force will break the disc. 
(cid:131)  Don’t use a damaged disk or wheel – watch for cracks or chips. 
(cid:131)  Be gentle – let the tool do the job – don’t apply excessive pressure. 
(cid:131)  Always wear goggles, medium impact face shield and hearing protection. 
(cid:131)  Take the time to read and follow the manufacturer’s instructions of the wheel or disc being used – don’t 

use after the ‘use-by’ date has expired. 

(cid:131)  Transport discs and wheels carefully to avoid damage. 
(cid:131)  Store wheels and discs in dry, cool conditions. 
(cid:131)  Clear others from the work area in case the wheel or disc shatters causing numerous high-speed 

projectiles. 
The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2004 

