Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 14  
 

WHAT HAPPENED: 

MATERIAL HANDLING (DRILL PIPE) RESULTS IN AN LTI 

A incident occurred during the routine task of offloading tubulars from a work boat that resulted in a Roustabout 
sustaining  a  fractured  arm.    As  the  preliminary  incident  investigation  has  confirmed  this  incident  was  no 
accident  but  once  again  a  series  of  events  which  were  not  effectively  managed  and  collectively  produced  an 
unacceptable  result.    The  operation  was  offloading  bundles  of  3-1/2”  drill  pipe  from  a  supply  vessel.    Events 
involved in this incident include:  1.  The Assistant Crane Operator was attempting to spot the first bundle in 
the starboard pipe rack with one Roustabout flagging (Banksman) and the other Roustabout standing adjacent 
to the pipe rack on a walkway.  2.  The Assistant Crane Operator’s view of the landing area was restricted by a 
tool basket.  3.  During the lowering of the load the Injured Roustabout left his position of safety and entered the 
area of pipe rack bay.  4.  The load appeared to have struck a Sampson Post and recoiled towards the injured 
party  who  had  taken  a  position  between  the  load  and  the  tool  basket,  a  blind  spot.    5.    As  the  load  swung 
towards the Roustabout he raised his arms across his chest to protect himself and the load struck his right arm 
causing the fracture. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

•  Failure to conduct proper Job Risk Assessment (JRA) and identify and manage known hazards. 
•  Failure to implement effective Management of Change. 
•  Crane Operator had gone to the galley leaving the Assistant in charge. 
•  The injured party had never worked offshore previously and his appointed Safety Partner was also in the 

galley at the time of the incident. 

•  The Banksman (Signalman) was relatively inexperienced this being only his second hitch. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed its rig personnel to do 
the following: 

Discuss as a team what went wrong and consider the following: 
•  Leadership / Supervision 
•  Short Service Employee (SSE) Safety Partner Responsibilities 
•  Team Work 
•  Varying levels of inexperience 
•  Blind spots and body positions 
•  Time Out 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2005 

