Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 13  
 

FAILURE TO SECURE SLING RESULTS IN DROPPED OBJECT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig had been going into the hole with 5" drill pipe and the driller was washing down the last stand of drill 
pipe.    During  this  process  a  wire  rope  sling  dropped  from  derrick-board  to  rig  floor  (about  26  m  [85  feet]).  
The sling had been used to secure a snatch block to the derrick board handrail and it appeared that derrick-
man decided to take the snatch block off but he did not secure the wire rope to the derrick or snatch block.  
This allowed the wire rope sling to drop to the rig floor. 
 

Wire rope sling that dropped to the rig floor. 

Point of attachment on handrail. 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
 

Improper placement:  The snatch block was anchored by a wire sling to the monkey board handrail 
which, is not a designated anchoring point.  

  Lack of safety awareness from the derrick-man as he left the wire sling unsecured and loose on the 

monkey board after removing the snatch block.  This created a dropped object. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed  rig  personnel  to  properly  secure  the  snatch  block  to  the  designated  anchoring  point  on  the 
derrick-board. 

Instructed rig personnel that the check list is to be checked on regular basis. 

  A dropped object checklist was prepared for all objects in the derrick. 
 
  Had a campaign to raise DROPS awareness. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2010 

