Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 32 
 

FATALITY – HIGH PRESSURE AIR RELEASE 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A fatality occurred when two employees working on a floating MODU, were in the process of disconnecting 
the  “U”  tube  of  the  number  three  tensioner  from  the  isolation  valve.    This  was  being  done  in  an  effort  to 
initiate  repairs  to  the  damaged  marine  riser  tensioner  (MRT).    While  removing  the  last  bolt  of  the  isolation 
valve flange, the internal parts of the valve blew out and struck the injured employee in the head and face.  It 
was later discovered that they were actually dismantling the valve body because they had misidentified the 
flange as a separation point for the line.  The employees had inadvertently released the 400 psi of air on the 
3 inch line and the internal parts of the valve. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The subsequent investigation revealed that the crew assigned with the task of preparing the tensioner for 
removal  did  not  have  full  knowledge  of  the  valve  assembly  and  the  necessity  for  completely  venting 
pressure on pressurized lines. 

•  A  false  sense  of  security  was  created  by  the  lack  of  pressure  on  the  downstream  vent  valve  on  the 

number three tensioner. 

•  Pressure  was  left  on  the  line  in  the  event  that  a  quick  charge  was  needed  to  put  the  number  seven 

tensioner which was paired with the number three, tensioner into service. 

•  This job was planned to be broken down into three phases.  At the completion of each phase the job was 
to be stopped and the next phase was to be planned before going forward.  This three phase process did 
not occur. 

•  The crews were into phase two when the incident occurred and there was no stoppage of work or phase 

planning between phase one and two. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
  
• 

Instructed  rig  personnel  that  when  they  are  working  on  pressurized  lines  and/or  pressure  vessels, 
regardless  of  the  product  contained  the  pressure  is  to  be  vented  before  the  work  begins  and  isolating 
valves are to be tagged-out . 
Instructed  supervisory  personnel  to  discuss  this  alert  with  all  employees  offshore  and  in  the  various 
yards.  

• 

•  Thee company plans to issue further recommendations in the forms of Tech Alerts, addendums to this 

alert and changes to systems affected. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2008 

