Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 12  
 

EQUIPMENT SHIFT DURING RIG UP RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While attempting to install center steel (spreader beam) during rig up on a box-on-box substructure, the top 
of the boxes moved away from each other as a crane attempted to adjust a sub half for pin placement.  The 
BOP scaffold, which had been put in place prior to pinning the center steel, was pulled off its track and fell 
approximately 12 feet (3.7 meters).  Two employees were standing at one end  of the scaffold.  They  were 
wearing  their  fall  protection  harness  and  lanyard  and  were  tied  off  above  their  heads  to  the  substructure.  
The equipment worked as intended; no injuries occurred. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  While being hoisted, one side of the substructure moved up and out enough to break the scaffold rollers 

and track stops, allowing it to fall to the ground. 

•  Rolling Scaffold - The scaffold was placed in position prior to securing the substructure halves.  
•  Center  Steel  Placement  –  Rig  specific  guidelines  and  /  or  JSA-Work  Plan  for  placing  center  steel  to 

secure the substructure halves were either not known or not utilized.  

•  Multiple Components – Once erected, several brace components can be removed as one piece; to save 
time the crews decided to install them as one piece, rather than breaking them down and installing them 
separately. 

•  Drillers  and  Crews  –  The  crew  members  did  not  recognize  the  hazard  of  placing  the  scaffold  in  the 

substructure prior to installing adequate center steel. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  company  reminded  all  personnel  that  the  rolling  scaffold  is  NOT  to  be  placed  in  the  substructure 
until the Rig Manager verifies that an adequate amount of center steel is pinned into place to keep the 
sub from separating. NO exception without up-line approval. 

•  Rig  Managers  and  Superintendents  were  instructed  that  they  shall  take  steps  to  identify  rig  specific 
procedures  for  placing  and  pinning  center  steel  and  communicate  these  steps  to  rig  move  companies, 
Drillers, and crews PRIOR to rig up. JSA / Work Plans shall include this information. 

•  The  company  reminded  all  Rig  Managers  that  unless  approved  by  an  up-line  Drilling  Superintendent, 
brace components shall be separated PRIOR to rig up; considerations should be given to separation of 
the components during the rig down procedure. 

•  The company instructed the Drilling Superintendent and Rig Manager that they shall be responsible for 
ensuring  that  these  minimum  requirements  are  adequately  communicated  to  all  new  Drillers  to  the  rig 
and / or rig type. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2014 

