Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 14 
 

MUD PUMP MAINTENANCE RESULTS IN SERIOUS INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The swab in the #1 mud pump needed changing so Pump #1 was shut down and the #2 pump was placed in 
service.  A lock was placed on the #1 pump circuit breaker.  No other Lockout/Tagout (LOTO) requirements 
were performed.  The crew changed the swab on the pump and the derrickman was tightening nuts on the 
rod clamp and hooking up the liner washer.  The motorman called the driller telling him all they had left to do 
was rig up the liner washer and then went into the SCR house and removed the LOTO lock from the breaker 
panel. He went back to the mud house and called the driller telling him to “go ahead".  The driller turned the 
potentiometer on his control panel to prime the pump while the derrickman was still working on the pump.  As 
a result the derrickman’s lower leg was caught between the rod clamp and mud pump when the pump was 
powered up and his lower leg was seriously injured 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The crew did not follow the company’s Lockout/Tagout Procedure: 

a.  The required Lockout/Tagout form was not completed or followed for the job. 
b.  All sources of energy were not locked out. 
c.  Work area was not inspected prior to removal of LOTO. 
d.  All employees were not notified prior to removal of LOTO. 
e.  Communications between the driller and the motorman were unspecific.  The motorman 

informed the driller to “go ahead” instead of “shut down pump #2”. 

f.  The crew working on pump #1 was not aware the driller had already shut down the #2 pump and 

was preparing to start up pump #1.  

g.  The lock on the #1 pump circuit breaker was removed while the pump was still being worked on.  

The company’s Lockout/Tagout Procedure, including the LOTO Verification Form, MUST be 
followed and used as a step-by-step guide for isolating equipment prior to initiating work.   

2.  A pre-job meeting was not held to plan the work.  
3.  A JSA was not written or reviewed prior to initiating the job. 
4.  The crew left the control switch for the blower on the pump traction motor in the Manual position.  This 

results in the blower continuing to run after the pump is shut down.  Putting this switch in the Automatic 
position will shut down the blower along with the pump.  The noise created by starting the blower is a 
good clue that a pump has power or is running. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Rig  managers,  drillers,  superintendents,  and  safety  managers  should  increase  the  monitoring, 

supervision, and training for LOTO on a daily basis for all rigs. 

2.  Utilize a pre-job meeting to ensure that all personnel are aware of the hazards of the task at hand.  All 
communication  on  the  rig  needs  to  be  specific  for  what  is  to  be  done.    Examples  include:  “shut  down 
pump 2”; “pump is unlocked and ready” or “don’t put your fingers on top of the tong handles” as opposed 
to “go ahead”. 

3.  Write and utilize a JSA prior to starting the job.   
4.  Make certain all appropriate mud pump equipment is shut down when repairing or doing maintenance on 
pumps.    This  includes  the  centrifugal  pump(s),  liner  washer,  traction  motor  blower.  Many  of  these  are 
currently hooked up to be on when the pump is turned on and some can be overridden with a manual 
control. These other pieces of equipment might also require LOTO. Install lockout devices on gate valves 
and  butterfly  valves  as  a  secondary  lock  out  measure  to  control  any  unforeseen  release  of  energized 
fluid. Examples include the 4” mud line valve, tank suction valve would be locked in closed position and 
the 2” bleed off valve would be locked in the open position. 

 
IADC  Note:    Refer  to  Section  3.1  of  the  IADC  HSE  Reference  Guide  for  additional  information  on 
LOTO and/or IADC Safety Meeting Topic Book topic on Lockout/Tagout 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2008 

