Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 16 
 

DROPPED OBJECT DURING TRUCK LOADING OPERATION 

RESULTS IN LOST TIME INCIDENT 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An incident occurred when the rig crew was in the process of loading a skid (3rd party modified shale bin) to a 
truck  for  removal  from  the  rig  site.    To  give  the  crane  operator  the  signal  to  slack  off  the  load  the  injured 
person (IP) positioned himself in between the rear of the load and a pipe tub (3 foot space), just as the load 
was positioned onto the truck.  As the crane operator slacked off the load, a 500+ pound ramp (225kg) slid 
from the position it was in on the skid and fell to the ground.  In the process it struck and pinned the IP under 
the ramp.  The IP was removed from beneath the ramp and stabilized on site and Medivaced from location 
for medical treatment. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  The third party had no Management of Change Policy or Procedure referred to in order to ensure quality 

control before the equipment was redesigned and moved to the rig site.  

2. 

Improper  risk  assessment:    Failure  to  identify  hazards  after  the  modifications  had  been  made  and  no 
formal JSA was completed before loading the unit onto the truck. 

3.  The skid being moved without all the equipment first being secured. 

4. 

Incorrect rigging and slinging being applied to the load. 

5.  The IP positioning himself in between the back of the truck and the pipe tub to signal the crane operator. 

6.  The crane operator slacking off the load while the IP was standing between the load and pipe tub. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Third Party was instructed to implement Management of Change Policy and Procedures.  

2.  Rig supervisors were told to have better scrutiny of third party lifts and loads. 

3.  Operations personnel were instructed to conduct a safety audit of all cargo boxes, containers that are to 

be used and loading procedures within the operations. 

4.  Rig  personnel  were  instructed  to  ensure  that  proper  risk  analysis  is  completed  before  starting  a  job. 

Modify and update the JSA and procedure for general lifts while using the crane. 

5.  Rig supervisors were instructed to reinforce the company’s STOP WORK policy and get a commitment 
from  all  the  personnel  on  site  about  their  responsibilities  of  stopping  the  job  when  unsafe  acts  or 
conditions are noticed. 

6.  The company is to implement competency training program for rigging and slinging for crew members. 

7.  Operations  personnel  need  to  review  the  standard  rig  start  up  sling  package  for  land  rigs  to  ensure 

standard equipment.  

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2008 

