Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 05 
 

RADIO ANTENNA CONTACTS HIGH VOLTAGE POWER LINES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  a  recent  rig  move,  an  incident  occurred  involving  electrical  power  lines.  The  rig  camp  was  being 
transported  to  the  new  location.    A  new  radio  antenna  had  recently  mounted  on  the  Rig  Manager’s  office 
building.  When the building was being transported, the antenna came in contact with an overhead power line 
with  22,000  volts  of  current.    The  lines  were  hanging  across  the  road  as  per  normal  practice.    When  the 
antenna contacted the line it was severely damaged and the truck that was carrying the load blew 2 tires.  No 
injuries occurred but the company has classified this incident as a high potential Near Miss. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
No one was aware that the height of the new antenna would allow it to make contact with the power lines.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to rig and 
supervisory personnel:   
 
•  All antennas should be removed or lowered prior to moving the rig. 
•  Antennas should be mounted in a way that they can be lowered. 
•  A designated route for the rig move should be agreed upon and the route scouted for any potential 

hazards prior to beginning the rig move. 

•  The height of overhead power lines above the road should be checked prior to the rig move. 
•  A safety meeting should be held with all crew members to discuss electrical safety. 
•  A JSA should be completed as part of the pre move risk assessment to ensure all tasks and hazards 

associated with the tasks are identified and corrected. 
If you should be in a vehicle that is in contact with an overhead power line, DON'T LEAVE THE VEHICLE. 
As long as you stay inside and avoid touching metal on the vehicle, you may avoid an electrical hazard. If 
you need to get out to summon help or because of fire, jump out without touching any wires or the 
machine, keep your feet together, and hop to safety. 
If an object (scaffolds, crane, etc.) must be moved in the area of overhead power lines, appoint a 
competent worker whose sole responsibility is to observe the clearance between the power lines and the 
object.  Warn others if the minimum distance is not maintained. 

• 

• 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2003 

