Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

HIGH POTENTIAL INCIDENT – DROPPED KELLY 

 
ALERT 06 – 08 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

In preparation to pick up a 3 ½” Kelly, the 5 ¼” Kelly and swivel connections were broken with pipe in the 
hole to lend stability to the process.  The 5 ¼” Kelly was then placed in the rat-hole (Kelly shuck) with broke 
connections  until  such  time  that  it  could  be  laid  down  and  the  3  ½”  Kelly  could  be  picked  up  for  the  next 
drilling interval.   

Prior the operations getting to a point where the 5 ¼” Kelly was going to be laid down, a change of crews 
occurred.    The  new  crew  began  preparing  to  test  Blowout  Preventer  Equipment  and  they  were  having 
difficulty getting the cup tester to set in the casing below the BOPE.  So they picked up the Kelly to help push 
the cup tester down into position.  Not knowing that the Kelly connections were broken, the driller activated 
the Kelly spinner to align the cup tester with the casing opening.  The swivel’s left handed threads backed 
out of the Kelly which separated at the break and the Kelly fell to the off-driller’s side of the floor onto the air 
hoist and sample house.  No injuries resulted.   

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Breakdown  in  communication.    There  were  no  handover  notes  indicating  that  the  connections  had  been 
broken  loose.    Setting  back  a  “disabled”  Kelly  creates  a  perception  of  readiness,  and  requires  that  ALL 
supervisors are aware of the Kelly’s condition.  The Kelly connections were not marked to indicate that they 
were  broken  loose.    Lockout/tagout  not  utilized.    The  Kelly  spinner  control  was  not  locked  out  nor  was  it 
tagged out.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

Communication!  The use of handover notes is an excellent means of detailing prior activities and expected 
operations.  Critical information should be posted in a conspicuous area such as a doghouse white board, or 
use a paint stick to put a message on the weight indicator.  Make a note in the Daily Drilling Report and carry 
this message over everyday that the Kelly remains broken in its rat hole.  Make the Handover Notes concept 
a formal process for each and every job position. 

A  Lock  out/Tagout  is  another  system  (barrier)  to  prevent  this  kind  of  incident.    De-energizing  the  Kelly 
spinner by disconnecting the air and placing a lock and tag on the supply valve would also have helped to 
alert personnel of the Kelly’s condition. 

The JSA for breaking out the Kelly should be modified to include disabling the Kelly spinner in the event that 
a  Kelly  which  has  had  the  connections  broke  loose  is  setback.    These  systems  aren’t  just  exercises  to 
appease management; these are fundamental barriers to prevent injury and equipment damage. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2006 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Assuming people know what is going on is a huge mistake.  If the Kelly is set back into the rat hole with the 
connections broken, assume the possibility that someone will pick up the Kelly, unaware of its condition, and 
back off the connections.  Now what can be done to prevent your assumption from happening?   

♦  disconnect the Kelly spinner air line and lock it out (not just close the air valve) 
♦  write this important information on the weight indicator, if practical 
♦  write this information on a white board 
♦  put this information in the handover notes and pass it on 
♦  verbally tell your relief and his lead floorhand 
♦ 
♦ 
♦ 
 

tell your supervisor 
tell your crew to mention the status of the Kelly in their handover (verbal and/or written) 
tell the operator’s representative 

 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2006 

