Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 33 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – DERRICK LIGHT FIXTURE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A 41-pound (18 kg) explosion proof 400-watt Mercury Vapor light fixture fell 20 feet (6 meters) from the derrick and landed 
on  the  rig  floor  in  front  of  the  Drawworks.    The  electrical  cable  pulled  out  of  the  light  leaving  the  cable  energized  in  the 
derrick.  No injuries were associated with this incident. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT:   
 
1.  The bolts that connected the light fixture to the bracket, vibrated loose. 
2.  The light was a new type, and when the light was installed into the derrick a risk assessment was not done to identify 

the potential hazards.  Because of this: 
•  The safety cable was secured to the bracket, instead of the light fixture. 
•  There is no means to secure the safety cable directly to the light fixture. 

3.  The loose bolts and the improper manner in which the safety cable was secured to the fixture were missed during the 

weekly derrick inspection. 

4.  During the weekly derrick inspection the inspector noted the safety cable was present, however a detailed inspection 

of the light and how the light was secured was not. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives and 
action items: 
 
Directives 
 
1.  Risk assessments must be done when installing new equipment or same-type equipment in a new location to ensure 

all potential hazards are identified and safety measures are in place. 

2.  When  performing  the  weekly  derrick  inspection  the  inspectors  must  carefully  exam  each  item  (lights,  raceways, 
sheaves, secondary fall protection blocks, etc) and confirm that the item is properly secured to the bracket, and the 
bracket to the fixture, and that the safety cable is secured in a manner to prevent the fixture and bracket from falling. 

3.  Prior to the purchase of new items that are to be installed overhead it should be confirmed that the item is designed so 

a safety cable may properly be installed to the fixture. 

 
Action items 
 
1. 

Inspect all overhead equipment that has the potential to fall (lights, sirens, horns, etc) in the derrick, walkways, living 
quarters, etc., and ensure the safety cable is secured to the fixture and bracket.  If the safety cable cannot be secured 
to  the  fixture,  the  equipment  should  be  removed  from  service.    Inspect  all  safety  cables  and  ensure  the  cable  is 
secured in a manner to prevent the dropped object from falling closer than 6-1/2 feet(1.95 meters) from the deck. 

2.  All overhead equipment must have “double nuts” if possible.  If unable to “double nut” equipment due to design, than 

alternative means (jam nuts, lock washers, cotter pins, etc.) must be utilized to prevent nuts from vibrating loose. 

 
Note:  See IADC Alerts – 00 – 05, 00 – 18, 00 – 31, 02 – 04, 02 – 07, 02 – 35, 02 – 38, 03 – 06,  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued August 2003 

