Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 07 

ADJUSTING THE LINK ASSEMBLY ON PIPE SPINNER RESULTS IN A 

RESTRICTED WORK CASE (RWC) 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The motorman (Injured Person [IP]) was requested to inspect and adjust the adjustable link assembly on the 
pipe spinner.  The motorman (IP) was lining up the hole on the clevis of the adjustable link assembly with the 
hole on the operating arm using his left hand.  At the same time he turned the air supply back on in order to 
move the operating arm into position.  The IP operated the control valve with his right hand.  The pressurized 
operating  arm  of  the  pipe  spinner  moved  forward  and  contacted  with  the  clevis  of  the  adjustable  link 
assembly.  This caused in the clevis link to kick towards the main body of the pipe spinner.  The IP’s ring 
finger was caught between the clevis link and the main body of the spinner which resulted in the tip of his 
ring finger being severed. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
  Lack of safety discipline due to no pre-job planning and no JSA being conducted. 
 
 
 

IP did not inform his immediate supervisor of performing the job on the rig floor. 
IP was not aware of the potential risk of his hand position. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  A JSA was created and procedures for this task were generated. 
  Re-trained the IP and other crew members in reviewing JSA’s and the Step Back 5x5 programs. 
  Re-trained  the  IP  and  all  other  maintenance  helpers  on  the  importance  of  implementing  the  JSA  and 

 

Permit to Work System. 
Instructed rig personnel that Maintenance Supervisor is to be informed before undertaking any task, so 
that assistance or instruction can be supplied as needed.   

  These instructions will be added to the company JSA and Procedures programs. 

 

 

 

Direction in which the 
clevis kicked off  

 

Operating Valve  

Position of IP left hand 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2011 

