Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 01  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

DROPPED OBJECT – GUIDE COLLAR SEGMENT SEPARATES FROM WINCH LINE 

AND FALLS INTO THE WATER 

On a floating rig the guide collar for a down-hole pump assembly was separated into its 2 segments for lifting 
to  the  rig  floor  from  the  moon  pool  platform.  The  master  bushings  were  removed  and  a  winch  line  was 
lowered  and  attached  to  a  rig  made  handle  on  the  first  segment.    There  was  no  lifting  eye.  (See  photos 
below).  

Although there was a spotter with UHF radio in the moon pool area and a spotter at the rotary table to signal 
the winch operator, as the guide collar segment entered the rotary table, it caught on the diverter housing. 
The handle broke off and the 25 kilogram guide collar fell and struck the moon pool equipment support 
beams then fell into the water.  Since personnel had been evacuated from the drop zone, there were no 
injuries.  

 

 

Lifting handle that the cable was attached to.   

 

 

Area  where  the  busing  fell  to  in 
moon pool 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  There was no proper lifting eye (or manufactured lifting hole) on the collar guide segment.   

  The handle was too weak to sustain a snag and easily broke off.  

 

 Rig motion was also a likely contributing factor. (Since master bushings were removed, it would not be 
safe for anyone to attempt to center the tool as it passed through the table.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

  Client and Third-Party Contractor changed procedures for transporting the collar guide segments to the 

rig floor.  The segments would no longer be lifted through the rotary table.  

  The  OIM  must  approve  anything  lifted  through  the  rotary  table  with  his  senior-level  supervisor 

supervising the lift.  

  Procurement policies should be revised to require that third party companies should provide equipment 
with built-in suitable lifting points that will not break off while being lifted even if it snags on something.        

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2010 

