Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 13   
 

RIGGER SUSTAINS HAND INJURY DURING RIG MOVE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  removing  a  2,100lbs.  (953  Kg)  set  of  stairs  from  the  top  dog  house,  a  rigger’s  hand  was  caught 
between the stair’s handrail and an air conditioning unit on the top dog house.  The rigger was on the porch 
of the top dog house with a drilling employee removing the pins from the stairs going to the top dog house.  
The rigger signaled for the crane operator to pick up on the stairs.  The crane operator picked the stairs up 
level  and  stopped.    The  rigger  then  signaled  the  crane  operator  to  pick  up  on  the  stairs  a  few  more  feet 
(meters); however, when the crane operator picked up on the load, he soon realized that the stairs were in a 
bind and stopped again.  Immediately after stopping, the stairs broke out of the bind and swung towards the 
top dog house.  The rigger’s left hand was on the inside handrail as the stairs came up and caught his hand 
between the stairs and the air conditioning unit of the top dog house. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  Crane  personnel  made  the  decision  to  attempt  to  pick  up  the  stairs  at  a  difficult  angle  due  to  the 
placement of hydraulic fracturing tanks and pallets of mud in front of the rig.  This caused the crane 
to be over-extended and excessively boomed down.  

  Line of sight restriction between the crane operator and the rigger resulted from obstructions.   
  The chokers and chains were not adjusted to allow  the angle of the steps to come up without first 

  The  rigger  failed  to  recognize  the  potential  of  the  steps  to  come  loose  and  to  position  himself 

being in a bind. 

accordingly. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

  All employees were reminded to ensure that there is adequate room to make the lift safely. 
  Riggers were reminded to ensure that the rigging is properly positioned over the center of gravity of 

the load and the boom and rigging is properly adjusted at the correct angle for the lift.   

  Crane operators and riggers were instructed to ensure that the line of sight is not obstructed.  
  Riggers  were  instructed  to  check  their  position  during  each  lift  and  ensure  they  have  an  escape 

  Riggers  were  reminded  to  consider  what  could  happen  when  items  are  in  stress/bind  or  stored 

route.   

energy is released. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2012 

