Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 13 
 

IMPROPER ATTACHMENT OF SAFETY LINE RESULTS  

IN A DROPPED OBJECT  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While finishing the pressure testing of the well head valve, the rig crew members were instructed to break out 
the saver sub, lower Internal Blowout Preventer (IBOP) and upper IBOP for Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) 
inspection.    The  Top-Drive  System  (TDS)  saver  sub  was  broken  out  using  the  TDS  Pipe  Handler.    While 
attempting to break out the lower IBOP, it started to spin and after three attempts to break it out, the Driller 
and the Night Pusher decided to use the rig tong to break out the lower IBOP.  The lower IBOP was gripped 
by the make-up tong and TDS applied reverse torque to the upper IBOP.  The tong applied torque directly to 
the  TDS  track’s  lower  attachments  causing  the  TDS  guide  beam  to  come  out  from  the  lower  tie  back  link 
causing it to turn and twist some guide beam components.  The intermediate tieback's bolts were sheared 
and the intermediate tie back (Approx.  12kg) fell 10 meters to the rig floor. No one was injured.   
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Night  Pusher  and  Driller  did  not  comply  with  the  procedure  for  breaking  out  the  IBOPs  from  the  Top-

 

 

Drive System.   

upper IBOPs. 

•  This  was  the  first  time  to  do  the  job  with  one  tong  which  is  a  short  cut  for  breaking  out  the  lower  and 

•  This shortcut was taken without authorization or advice from the Senior Toolpusher. 
• 

Incorrect  securing  for  the  intermediate  tieback  was  made  on  the  mast  beam  with  the  securing  wire 
wrapped around the intermediate tieback itself instead of being wrapped around the mast beam as was 
required to prevent a dropped object.    
Improper tieback allowed the tieback beam to fall from 10 meter 

• 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  The pipe handler is to be used for breaking /making up the IBOP connection.   
2.  Make sure that the pipe handler clamp cylinder pressure is 2000 psi and the dies are in good condition. 
3. 

In case of using rig tongs for breaking the IBOP or saver sub from the main shaft, it’s important to use a 
pup joint in order to maintain it in the center and prevent the twisting motion. 

4.  Any  non-routine  job  related  to  the  TDS  should  be  performed  under  the  supervision  of  the  Rig  Senior 

Mechanic and Senior Toolpusher. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2008 

