Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 26 
 

FALL FROM HEIGHT RESULTS IN DOUBLE MTO 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two  Floormen  were  working  in  the  substructure  approximately  4  metres  (13.4  feet)  above  the  ground  and 
removing the bell nipple from the top of the blowout preventer (BOP).  The flow line had been disconnected 
from the bell nipple but was still attached to the winch on the drill floor when it was raised unexpectedly.  The 
flow line flange knocked the bell nipple from the BOP seating and it fell to the ground.  The Floormen had 
moved from one side of the Bell Nipple (v-door side) to the other side (draw works side) where they had just 
connected a soft sling to secure the Bell Nipple.  One Floorman (#1 in picture below) had attached his shock 
absorbing lanyard to the Bell Nipple (approx 300 kg) and he was pulled down and fell to the ground.  The 
other Floorman (#2 in picture below) was knocked off balance and fell backwards to the extent of his shock 
absorber lanyard before coming to rest suspended upside down with the unused work platform stopping his 
fall any further.  His lanyard did not extend far enough to activate the shock absorber.  Both workers were 
standing on the BOP lifting bracket.  Both workers received soft tissue injuries and returned to work the next 
day.   
 

Position of 
Floorman #1 
before the fall 

BOP Lifting 
Bracket 

Bell Nipple struck 
work platform 

Original position 
of Bell Nipple 

Position of 
Floorman #2 
before fall 

Position of Floorman 
#2 suspended 
upside down 

Final position of 
Bell Nipple and 
Floorman #1 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The winch line connected to the flow line was supposed to have been disconnected. 
•  The original plan was to use two winch lines to remove the bell nipple, one through the mouse-hole and 
one  through  the  rotary  table.    One  line  was  ready  and  passed  through  the  mouse  hole,  but  not 
connected.  The Driller changed the plan to use only one winch.  

•  Neither worker was connected to the Safety Retracting Life (SRL) line fall arrestors which were attached 

to the underside of the rig floor on each side of the sub base. 

•  Lanyards used were not secured above head height and in one case the lanyard was connected to an 

unsecured anchor point (bell nipple). 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  All  four  studs  that  attach  the  bell  nipple  to  the  BOP  annular  had  been  removed  before  it  had  been 

secured with a hoist line. 

•  No procedure was available for this job. 
•  No JSA/JHA was used for this task. 
•  Brief pre-job discussion was inadequate for the task being undertaken and potential risk 
•  Lack of adequate and / or specific instructions during the task, particularly just before the incident. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Procedure  to  be  developed  with  sequential  steps  particularly  the  restraining  of  all  equipment  before 

unbolting or removing it. 

•  Ensure all provided safety devices are used (in this case fall arrestors) 
•  Processes to be put in place to ensure adequate and thorough Pre Job meetings are planned as part of 

the job, including the communication of hazards and why controls are necessary to prevent an accident. 

•  Ensure all instructions given during a job are specific, understood and recorded. 
•  Outline Supervisor expectations to ensure that jobs are undertaken safely 
•  Reinforce  to  the  work  force  that  they  are  empowered  to  STOP  THE  JOB  when  safety  controls  or 

precautions are bypassed.  

•  Ensure fall protection lanyard is secured to a suitable (stable) anchor point.   
•  To reduce fall distance, lanyards are to be secured to anchor points that are above head height. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2008 

