Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

FAILURE OF SAFETY DEVICES ALLOWED 

CASING STABBING BASKET TO FALL TO RIG FLOOR 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the rig crew was running a bottom hole assembly into the hole, the casing stabbing basket (CSB) fell 
to  the  rig  floor  and  toppled  over.    As  it  tipped  over,  the  Casing  Stabbing  Basket  contacted a  de-energized 
electrical cable, which in turn pushed a floorhand to the rig floor.  While the floorhand was not struck directly 
by the Casing Stabbing Basket, he did experience two lacerations to the head; one on the forehead and the 
other  on  the  top  of  the  head.    The  crew  assisted  the  floorhand  from  within  the  confines  of  the  Casing 
Stabbing  Board  and  to  the  rig  doghouse  where  the  crew  administered  first  aid.    The  floorhand  was 
transported  to  the  local  medical  clinic  where  the  wounds  were  sutured.    The  floorhand  was  subsequently 
seen in an emergency room for further evaluation and received a work release. 

 
ALERT 06 – 43 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

1.  The Casing Stabbing Basket winch cable broke:   

•  Due  to  extremely  high  winds  over  several  days,  the  cable  which  raises  and  lowers  the  CSB, 

rubbed against a piece of angle iron.  The rubbing eventually frayed the cable until it broke. 

2.  The Line Break Safety System did not engage.  

•  When the CSB began to fall the springs that should have applied tension and make the safety 

dogs engage failed.   

3.  The CSB parking brake did not engage.  

•  The parking brake spring was missing. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

1.  Modifications were made to the existing Casing Stabbing Basket to improve safety device function. 
2.  Specifics  of  Casing  Stabbing  Board  (functional  and  safety)  were  added  to  pre-job  inspection  as 

referred to in the Rig Operating Guidelines for running all tubulars. 

3.  The derrick inspection checklist were modified to include the safety features of the Casing Stabbing 

Basket. 

4.  Training on operation of Casing Stabbing Baskets to be implemented. 
5.  Casing  Stabbing  Baskets  and  all  its  critical  components  will  be  added  to  the  Preventative 

Maintenance Program being sure to specify frequency of inspections. 

6.  Develop rig operating guidelines specific to Casing Stabbing Baskets for the entire fleet of rigs. 
7.  Placards will be developed and posted that provide operating instructions and safety hazards while 

operating Casing Stabbing Baskets. 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2006 

