Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 36  
 

FALL RESULTS IN RECORDABLE INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig was preparing to run 60” casing.  The rotary was removed and a barrier was built by the rig welder 
and installed around the opening.  The Driller and the Derrickman had discussed the need to rig up the rig’s 
choke line hose.  The hose was laying on the main deck and needed to be hoisted up to the rig floor.  At first 
it was decided to use the rig intercom system for communication.  The Derrickman had proceeded to the rig 
floor to lower the rig air hoist and the Driller remained on the main deck to hook up to the choke line hose.  
The Driller decided to use hand held radios for communication instead of the rig intercom system.  The Driller 
retrieved  two  hand  held  radios  from  the  office  while  the  Derrickman  remained  on  the  rig  floor.    When  the 
Driller returned with the radios he threw one of the radios up from the main deck to the Derrickman who was 
looking through the opening left by the removal of the rotary table.  The Derrickman caught the radio and fell 
forward toward the barricade leaning against the top railing.  One of the barricade post collapsed causing the 
Derrickman to fall forward and through the opening landing on the main deck 25 feet below.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The barricade was not built to company standards as stated in the company’s Offshore Personnel Safety 

Manual. (A fixed or portable barrier is to withstand a side load of at least 250 ft/lbs.) 

•  Examination of the barricade post showed that the welds used to secure the post were not a solid weld 

with gaps between the welds. 

•  No JSA was done for the operation of rigging up the rig choke line hose.  The JSA would have indicated 

the means of communication for the rigging up of the choke line hose.  

•  Throwing the radio from the main deck through the opening to the rig floor. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel to: 
 
•  Discuss the incident in your next scheduled safety meeting and ensure the following: 

o  Personnel shall review and comply with company standards. 
o  Stress the importance of reviewing a JSA for ALL jobs 
o  Discuss the hazards of throwing objects from one level to the next. 

•  The company issued the following directive:  All rigs will use the New Style Hole Barricades (see pictures 

below).  If your rig is not equipped with this type of barricade a Correction Request is to be generated 
and the barricades are to be ordered through your Rig Superintendent ASAP. (Contact your Rig 
Superintendent if you have any questions). 
 

 

NEW STYLE BARRICADES  

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2006 

