Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 53 
 

CRANE BOOM FAILURE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While loading a truck with 9 5/8” casing using a 3rd party crane, the crane boom failed and fell just as the load 
was placed on the truck bed.  At the time of the incident the crane was transferring five joints of 9 5/8 inch 
casing.  This was a repetition of an incident that took place earlier using a 3rd party crane working for the same 
Operator. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The investigation showed that the crane was loading five joints of 9 5/8 inch casing in one bundle, while the 
crane was only rated to handle the weight of 3 joints of 9 5/8 inch casing at a time.   
 
1. 
2. 
3.  Supervision was not given during the performance of the job. 
4.  Lack of safety awareness by the crane operator. 
5.  Lack of verification of the weight of the load and the limitations of the crane. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  Lifting procedure will be followed. 
•  Maximum loading capacity of the crane will be determined and not exceeded while performing the job. 
•  All equipment utilized to hoist equipment should have valid certificate available on the unit all the time.   
•  Site supervisor is to verify the capacity of 3rd party equipment prior to commencement of work. 
•  Equipment without certification should not be operated at company sites or on company equipment where 

Incorrect lifting procedure (lifting five joints of casing in one bundle instead of three). 
Incorrect use of equipment. 

safety of our personnel or equipment is put at risk. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued December 2002 

