Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 20 

DRILL LINE PULLS THROUGH WIRE 

ROPE SNAKE WHILE STRINGING BLOCKS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While in the process of stringing the travelling blocks with brand new drill line, the 1-3/8 inch drill line came 
free from the Wire Rope Wire Mesh Snake Grip and dropped to the rig floor from approximately 20 meters.  
The line and snake grip had been reeved through all three sheaves on the off driller’s side and had passed 
through the first two sheaves on the driller’s side of the travelling block.  There was one last sheave on the 
travelling block to spool.   
 
The  snake  grip  was  in  good  condition  and  was  the  correct  type  for  the  line.    The  drill  line  had  been  fully 
inserted into the 1 inch - 1-1/2 inch snake grip right to the rubber boot and then 3 x hose clamps were used 
to secure the snake grip.  The clamps were then covered with tape for about 6 inches on each.  The snake 
grip was then attached to a 3/8 inch wire rope line by back splicing the line’s dead end through the snake 
grip's  soft  eye.    The  3/8  inch  wire  rope  is  used  to  pull  the  drill  line  through  the  crown  and  travelling  block 
sheaves.   
 
There were four essential people involved in the job on the rig floor but none were near the drop zone.  The 
pre job held emphasized the need for the rig floor to be clear.  There was no potential for injury. 
 

Tape and Clamp 

Snake 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Not following procedure:  A procedure is in place for the "Installation and use of a Lewis Snake".  
One step in the procedure is to "make sure the cable is clean and free of grease and oil in the areas 
that will be loaded into the snake grip”.  The manufacture procedure says: “The grips cannot grip an 
oily line no matter how hard they are compressing or squeezed.  A high grade degreaser and heavy 
duty disposable towels are recommended for this task." 

  Hazard  not  identified:    This  task  has  been  performed  by  the  crew  many  times  before  but  the 
change was the line was new and coated with an oily type preservative.  No one who was spoken to 
during the investigation was aware that cleaning the line was critical. 

  Hose clamp failure:  When the tape covering the hose clamps was removed after the incident two 
of the hose clamps had broken bands.  While guiding the line through the travelling block sheaves, 
it is likely the larger diameter clamp got caught up passing through the smaller diameter sheaves.  
The snake grip manufacturer recommends using banding or tape to secure the snake grip.  They 
also mention the option of using a nail through the end of the snake and bending the ends back to 
secure. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Rig personnel were instructed to follow the snake grip manufacture’s recommended “Band It® Clamp” so 

that the preferred method of securing the snake is used. 

  Distributed an internal safety alert to all rigs so that everyone is aware of the hazards of using a snake 

with oily or grease coated drill line. 

  Reinforced to all rigs to follow standard operating procedures so that all of the agreed and necessary 

steps of the job are known and communicated. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2011 

