Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 02 – 50 
 

CUTTING OFF CASING RESULTS IN FIRE IN THE CELLAR 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Casing (13 3/8") had been run in the hole and cemented in place.  The cement had been displaced using oil-
based  mud.    The  welder  was  instructed  to  cut  off  the  casing.    A  hot  work  permit  was  developed  with  the 
assistance of the operator’s safety rep and contractor supervisor and the hot work permit was issued for this 
job.    
 
To start the job, a torch was used to cut a hole in the casing to allow the fluid above the intended cut in the 
casing to drain.  When the hole was cut the torch ignited the oil-based mud as it sprayed out of the hole in the 
casing.    There  was  a  fire  watch  standing  by  who  immediately  extinguished  by  the  fire  and  the  job  was 
suspended.    
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The  level  of  oil  based  mud  in  the  casing  was  not  determined  prior  to  commencing  cutting  the  casing  off.  
Whenever  oil-base  mud  is  in  use  there  is  a  potential  for  fire  and  an  extremely  efficient  ignition  source  was 
provided with the cutting torch.  The “Fire Hazard” of oil based mud was not identified in the Hot Work Permit.  
Therefore purging requirements were not met.  The job was being performed around 2 AM following a cement 
job and personnel may not have been as alert as needed to be.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:   
 
To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  When  oil  based  mud  is  used  to  displace  cement,  pump  a  water  blanket  to  displace  the  oil  based  mud 

before cutting the casing.  

•  Ensure all personnel understand the requirements and follow “Hot Work Permit” procedure. 
•  Review MSDS for Oil Based Mud to get a better understanding of this concept  of oil-base mud catching 

•  Hot  Work  Permits  are  designed  to  prevent  these  kinds  of  incidents,  but  they  have  to  be  more  than  just 

exercising a required procedure.  They are there for your protection and must be taken seriously.   

fire.   

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2002 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued November 2002 

