Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 36 
 

LOOSE, UNSECURED CLOTHING RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  driller  was  killed  when  the  drawstring  of  an  oversized  jacket  he  was  wearing  caught  in  the  rotating 
Kelly/crossover  sub.    Just  prior  to  the  incident  the  Kelly  was  drilled  down.    In  preparation  to  making  a 
connection the driller doped the joint of pipe in the mouse hole.  After doping the joint of pipe, the driller was 
positioned next to the rotary table.  This allowed the drawstring on his oversized, unsecured jacket to contact 
and  became  engaged  in  the  rotating  Kelly/crossover  sub.    The  drawstring  then  pulled  the  jacket  and  the 
driller into the rotating Kelly/crossover sub resulting in a fatality. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Apparently the driller had neglected to secure (i.e., zip or button) the oversized jacket which allowed it to 

be caught in the rotating equipment.   

•  Failure to recognize the hazard of wearing loose clothing/not restraining cords, etc. from clothing.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  This incident demonstrates why loose, unsecured clothing MUST NEVER BE WORN WHILE AT WORK.  
•  All  personnel  must  remember  that  rotating  and  reciprocating  equipment  presents  a  potential  hazard 
which  must  be  respected.  We  must  all  remember  this  and  be  observant  and  mindful  to  remind  one 
another. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2007 

