Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 16 

HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS – HOISTING LINE 

DISCONNECTED FROM DRAWWORKS DRUM 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  well  service  operations  the  hoisting  line  (tubing  line)  disconnected  from  the  drawworks  on  a  well 
service  rig.    There  were  no  injuries  or  equipment  damage  but  severity  potential  was  high.    Loss  of  the 
hoisting line clamp could have resulted in dropping the traveling block.  Fortunately the traveling blocks were 
in an elevated position in the mast with twenty plus wraps of hoisting line on the drum.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

recommendations. 

were worn significantly. 

guidelines. 

•  The hoisting line (tubing line) clamp was not torqued to 150 foot pounds as per the manufacturer’s 

•  The  clamp  was  reused  an  undetermined  number  of  times  and  the  clamp’s  interior  friction  surfaces 

•  The clamp’s securing bolts were slightly deformed.   
•  The  clamp  was  not  visually  inspected  on  a  frequent  basis  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer’s 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel in the 
following: 
 

•  The  hoisting  line  (tubing  line)  clamp  should  be  installed  using  a  torque  wrench  to  confirm  that  the 

Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM’s) recommended torque is applied to the clamp bolts. 

•  The clamp should not be installed on a flame cut hoisting line end.  The clamp should be installed on 

a properly seized, mechanically cut wire rope end.   

•  The clamp should be inspected each time the clamp is removed from the line.   
•  The clamp should be replaced if any significant wear or deformation is observed.   
•  Replace the hoisting line (tubing line) clamp each time that the hoisting line (tubing line) is replaced. 
•  The clamp pocket cover should be removed and the clamp and hoisting line end should be visually 

•  Marking the hoisting line adjacent to the clamp is advisable to more easily recognize if the clamp has 

inspected on a weekly basis.   

slipped during operations.   

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2011 

