Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 07 – 05 
 

INCIDENT INVOLVING THE LINK TILT RESULTS IN A LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After  releasing  the  elevators,  the  derrickman  was  pulling  back  a  stand  of  drillpipe  when  the  driller 
simultaneously retracted the link tilt.  As the elevators returned to over well center the chains connecting the 
link tilt to the bale arms took the weight of the bales and elevators, causing a shuddering action on the link tilt 
system.  This caused the link tilt intermediate stop bar to pass the intermediate stops resulting in the link tilt 
fully extending at an uncontrolled speed striking the derrickman.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The Intermediate stop was not in the correct position because a rope tied on the intermediate stop had 
been  fastened  to  one  of  the  bail  arms.    The  continual  action  of  the  link  tilt  extending  and  retracting 
resulted in the rope attached to the bail arm to move downwards.  This resulted in the intermediate stop 
being gradually pulled downwards and out of position. 

•  Although  the  driller  had  begun  to  retract  the  link  tilt,  pressure  still  remained  in  the  system  as  it  is 
pneumatically operated.  The resultant pressure caused the link tilt to extend with speed and force when 
the intermediate stop bar passed the intermediate stop.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel to do the 
following: 
 
•  Remove the rope when it is not required. 
•  Do not tie the rope to the bail arm at any time. 
•  Consultation with the manufacturer to seek an engineering solution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2007 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Picture 1 Rope attached loosely to the bail 
arm using a half hitch 
 
Picture  2  Rope  moving  down  the  bail  arm 
causing  the  intermediate  stop  to  swivel 
down against the link tilt spring. (The action 
of  the  link  tilt  extending  and  retracting 
allowed the knot to slide down the bail arm. 
The  configuration  of  the  knot  allowed  the 
rope  to  move  down  the  bail  arm  and 
prevented  it  from  traveling  in  an  upwards 
motion) 

rope  on 

Picture  3  At  the  time  of  the  incident  the 
elevators  returned  to  the  position  of  the 
intermediate  stops.  The 
the 
intermediate  stop  was  pulling  down.  This 
resulted  in  the  stops  contacting  the  top  of 
the intermediate stops. 
 
Picture  4  The  action  of  the  elevators 
returning  to  position  caused  either  the 
intermediate  stop  bar  to  jump  over  the 
intermediate  stops  or 
intermediate 
stops to travel downwards enough to let the 
stop  bar 
intermediate 
position. 

travel  past 

the 

the 

 

 
 
 
 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2007 

