Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 11 
 

IMPROPER USE OF ELEVATORS WITH 

TOP DRIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a visit to an operating rig, the Top-drive Technician observed the elevators being used in the incorrect 
position (backwards) during tripping operations.  This occurred despite the fact that he had given instructions 
on the proper use explained the top drive system (TDS) in detail to the rig crew the previous day. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The Driller chose to re-install the elevators incorrectly (backwards) in order to extend the link tilts out further 
for the derrick man while racking back pipe.  In order for this configuration to be operated, the following steps 
needed to be performed: 
 
•  The  elevators  had  to  have  been  manually  removed,  turned  180  degrees  and  re-installed.    The  Driller 
would then be in a position to rotate the handler 180 degrees allowing the link tilt to extend further out 
(Drilling mode). 

 
•  The safety system which triggers the warning alarm at 60 feet (18 meters) above the rig floor and then 
triggers the braking system at 70 feet (21 meters) above the rig floor in order to prevent the TDS from 
ever reaching the monkey board level when the links are in the drilling position was switched off. 

 
In doing the above steps, the Driller knowingly violated procedures,-by-passed a safety device and put the 
equipment and more importantly, the safety of the Crew at serious risk. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The job was immediately stopped by the top-drive technician.  He explained again how the TDS needs to 
be set up for tripping and why.  He then supervised the crew to ensure that the TDS was set up properly 
in the tripping mode and the safety warning device enabled. 

•  A  behavioral  observation  card  was  written  and  handed  into  the  Rig  Supervisor  and  rig  Top-drive 

Supervisor. 

•  The  rig  Top-drive  Supervisor  then spoke  to  the  Field  Superintendent  and  explained  the  situation.    The 
Field  Superintendent  then  immediately  called  the  Rig  Manager  to  ensure  the  proper  procedures  are 
being maintained and enforced. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

to 

Elevator  Handles 
ALWAYS 
be 
positioned  pointing 
to  the  back  side  of 
the backup tong 

Back-Up tong 

Elevators 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2008 

