Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 08  
 

DROPPED OBJECT – JOINT OF HEAVY WEIGHT DRILL PIPE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
An  incident  occurred  recently  which  resulted  in  a  lift  sub  backing  out  in  the  elevators  and  a  joint  of  Heavy 
Weight drill pipe being released.  The drill crew was making up a sub to a single joint of 6-5/8” HW drill pipe. 
No elevators were available on the rig for the HW pipe size, so a decision was made to use a lift sub to pick-up 
the HW. The lift sub was made up with chain tongs and "bumped-up" with a hammer. The HW was then picked 
up in the elevators and moved over a sub and stabbed onto a rotating pin sub that was in the rotary bushing 
pinhole. The HW was spun-up with a pipe spinner. The torque from the spinner backed out the lift sub from the 
HW box and the joint of pipe fell across the drill floor. There were no injuries. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The lift sub was not torqued to the HW Drill Pipe.  The practice of "Hammer Tightening" a connection is not 
sufficient to withstand the torque and acceleration applied by a power spinner.  The crew was not watching the 
break for the potential of the lift sub backing out. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed Rig Supervisors to:  
 
•  Review this incident with all crews with specific focus on the ineffectiveness of hammer-tight connections 

to withstand the force of power tongs.   

•  Review with crews and modify all JSAs to reflect that all lift subs will be torqued to a minimum 20,000 ft-lb 

prior to being racked in the derrick or being spun with a power spinner.  

•  Review with crews and modify all JSAs to reflect that power-spinning equipment will not be used to make 

up any connection where a "Hammer-up” lift sub is overhead. 

•  Review with crews and modify all JSAs to require a specific individual be assigned to watch the break on 

all lift subs, lift caps, lift nubbins, etc. while being made up either manually or with power tools. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2003 

