Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 19 
 

TEMPORARY PLACEMENT OF MUD HOSE IN  
WALKWAY RESULTS IN A TRIPPING INCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A roustabout crew was cleaning out a storage room on the rig and moving some items to another area on the 
rig.  One employee was stepping out of the room, which has one step that is approximately 12 inches down 
to the main deck area.  There was a mud hose (marked with Danger flagging tape) that had been temporarily 
placed  in  the  walkway  in  front  of  the  storage  room  door  and  the  employee  stepped  through  the  door  and 
down onto the hose, twisting his ankle resulting in a fractured ankle.   

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The mud hose was placed in the walkway in front of the storage room door.  The employee should have paid 
more attention to his surroundings in order to avoid stepping on the hose after he had already passed over it 
previously.  The employee was wearing steel toe rubber boots which offers no ankle support and makes foot 
placement more difficult. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Recommended to their rigs:  
 
•  Consider rerouting the mud hose to an area that is less traveled.  If the same route is found to be the 
best one, then the hose should be placed along the wall away from any entries or exits and secured to 
avoid pump action vibration that could cause the hose to move along the deck. 

•  Do  not  step  out  of  rooms  while  carrying  anything  that  may  make  it  awkward  to  see  where  you  are 

•  Wear work boots that offer good ankle support and that makes foot placement easier. 
• 

Install  permanent  steel  mud  piping  to  avoid  the  use  of  temporary  hoses  if  this  is  going  to  become  a 
normal operation. 

stepping. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2006 

