Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 04 – 07 
 

WRENCH DROPPED FROM DERRICK 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While re-attaching an air hose for the lock bar on the compensator, an open-end wrench was dropped from the 
Derrick to the rig floor.  The crew had the tether tool set, however the open-end wrench in use was not part of 
the tether tools set so rope was used to secure the wrench.  No injuries were associated with this incident.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  Man Riding JSA was not reviewed as per company policy.  
2.  The ¼” short rope was not long enough to reach the air hose and remain secured to the air hoist cable, so 

the employee untied the rope from the air hoist cable and handed the wrench to another employee.  

3.  While re-attaching the air hose the employee dropped the wrench, which fell 90’ to the rig floor.  
4.  Supervisor did not provide proper Safety Leadership, and crew did not exercise proper safety work 

practices.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Directives  
 
1.  All Supervisors are responsible to ensure a Man Riding JSA is conducted to focus attention on the risks 

involved in lifting personnel to significant heights, as per company policy on Personnel Lifting & Fall 
Protection.  

2.  All Supervisors are responsible to ensure all tools going up in the Derrick will be secured while being 

hoisted and also secured while performing the job task, as per company policy.  

3.  All Drillers are responsible for maintaining a log for anyone who goes into the Derrick with tools or loose 

equipment; check and approve that they are secured to the person and brought back down as per the 
company’s Derrick Management Plan.  

4.  The company’s safety equipment supplier provides a spider lanyard, which can be secured to most tools 

5. 

that are not supplied in the tether tool kit.  The Spider lanyard is rated for tools up to 15 pounds.  
Instances when a tool needed for the task is not supplied in the tether tool set, or cannot be secured with 
the Spider lanyard, the Supervisor must ensure the tool is properly secured with rope.  
Inspect the Spider lanyard prior to each use and discard when defects are noted. 

6. 
7.  Man Riding Operations and Dropped Object prevention are very serious in nature and failure to ensure 

compliance these policies will not be tolerated.  

 
Action Items  
 
1.  All Rigs to conduct training with all crews on Personnel Lifting & Fall Protection.  
2.  All Rigs must conduct training with all crews on the importance of securing tool overhead.  
3.  All Drillers to conduct training on the company’s Derrick Management Plan Part, Control of Equipment, to 

ensure personnel understand and comply with logging tools and loose equipment that are used in the 
derrick.  

4.  All rigs to purchase and use company approved lanyards designed for tools.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued February 2004 

