Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 21 
 

IRON ROUGHNECK “STRUCK BY” INCIDENT RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  the  rig  crew  was  tripping  drill  pipe  out  of  the  well,  a  floorhand  was  struck  by  an  iron  roughneck  and 
suffered fatal injuries.  At the time of the incident the floorhand was fitting a collar clamp around a drill collar. 
Witnesses state that a remotely operated iron roughneck was engaged to extend while the worker was in its 
path.  Attempts to warn the person and stop the iron roughneck failed.  Even though this incident is subject to 
an  ongoing  investigation,  this  alert  provides  guidance  for  the  industry  on  the  risk  factors  and  hazards 
identified during the preliminary investigation. 
 

 

 

 

 

Photo of an Iron Roughneck 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Key issues: 

Initial design HAZOP (Hazardous Operation) may be inadequate and must be reviewed. 

• 
•  Ensure  safety  controls  exist  that  enable  workers  and  drillers  to  confirm  that  the  path  of  the  iron 

•  The  sound  of  equipment  moving  such  as  an  iron  roughneck  may  be  muffled  by  other  noises  on  the 

•  Layout or design of the drill rig and doghouse may impede a clear visual line of sight of workers in  the 

roughneck is clear of personnel. 

equipment or the work site. 

danger zones. 

•  Emergency stop controls must be nearby, identifiable, and readily accessible. 
•  Safety  controls  on  remotely  operated  devices  must  be  reviewed  regularly  to  ensure  that  they  are 

adequate in controlling any risk of injury or harm. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
Recommendations: 

•  Rig Managers are to assess all operational risks relating to the use and maintenance of iron roughnecks. 
•  Supervisors are to take all necessary and reasonable actions to ensure that no person or property is 

exposed to more than an acceptable level of risk relating to the use and maintenance of iron roughnecks. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2013 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  Engineering personnel should re-examine iron roughneck design and interaction with control systems to 
eliminate risk or implement controls to ensure any risk associated with the use and maintenance of iron 
roughnecks is within acceptable safety limits, having regard to each relevant safety requirement, and is 
as low as reasonably practicable.  

•  Engineering controls should consider mechanical barriers, audio-visual warnings and rig platform 

authorization controls that ensures people are in a safe area before iron roughnecks can be operated. 

•  Engineering personnel should ensure that engineering inspections have validated that the safety critical 

elements of iron roughneck operation, including all safety-related software and hardware functions to 
verify the suitability of the safety measures, are implemented. 

•  Maintenance and engineering personnel are to ensure test reports detailing all validations are recorded 

and managed as part of the SMP (Safety Management Plan) and can be presented for inspection if 
requested. 

•  Ensure that the provisions of Section 696 and Section 697 of the Petroleum and Gas (Production and 

Safety) Act 2004 are met. 

 
Credit to: 
 
 
 

State of Queensland, Department of Natural Resources and Mines, 2013 
Petroleum and Gas Safety Alert 58 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2013 

