Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 10 

TWO AUXILIARY BRAKE INCIDENTS RESULT FROM 

MISCOMMUNICATION 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
In  the  past  month  our  company  has  experienced  several  serious  incidents  that  could  be  described  as  a 
“Driller’s worst nightmare.”  

1.  Driller miscommunicated with his floorhand who, instead of lining up the proper valves to fill the trip tank, 
disengaged  the  dynamatic  brake handle.    This caused  the  brakes  to  get  hot,  and  the driller,  unable  to 
stop the downward travel of the blocks, ran the top drive into the rail stops. 

2.  Driller  turns  hydromatic  water  control  valve  in  the  wrong  direction,  choking  off  the  water  supply  to  the 
hydromatic causing the brakes to overheat.  He was unable to stop the descent of the blocks so the drill 
string and the elevators struck the rotary table, bending the joint of pipe in the elevators. 

 
No injuries resulted from these incidents and each could have been far worse. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
This is largely a communication problem.   
 

•  The crew and supervisors spoke different languages.   
•  The driller did not recognize which direction increased the flow of water to the hydraulic brake. 
•  The floorman came from a crew where the hand signals were different.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  To  address  the  communication  gap  and  prevent  this  kind  of  problem  from  occurring  on  rigs  where 
supervision and crews speak different languages, the company is developing rig-wide standardized hand 
signals.    

2.  The bolt and nut securing the Dynamatic brake handle were replaced with a padlock with the key kept in 

the driller’s control.   

3.  The brake handle was painted safety yellow to make it more visible.   
4.  The remedial action plan for the second brake incident included labeling the water control valve to the 

hydromatic thereby showing the direction of open and close.   

5.  Rig supervisors were instructed to review with all rig personnel the danger signs signifying overheating of 
mechanical  brakes.    When  mechanical  brakes  display  signs  of  overheating,  they  are  likely  being 
misused.   

These incidents have stimulated discussions among operations personnel.  A memo was sent to the field to 
solicit comments about these and other issues concering the drawworks brake systems.  It is anticipated that 
this safety bulletin will further promote that discussion. 

Both incidents and remedial action plans should prompt each of us to ask, “How are we managing the brake 
systems on our rig(s)?”  These incidents are likened to a “Driller’s Worst Nightmare” and STOP statistics tell 
us that the worst is yet to come unless we change our behavior.  Changing safety behavior will nullify this 
slippery slide down the slope to serious injury or a fatality.  Rig supervisors are to audit their brake system 
procedures, reviewing how brakes are used in their operation before their worst nightmare becomes reality! 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2007 

