Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 31  
 
PRESSURE RELIEF VALVE SPRAYS DILUTE ACID ACROSS LOCATION ON A 

FRAC JOB 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a frac job, a hydraulically-activated pressure relief valve, which was protecting the iron between the 
pumps and the wellhead, opened unexpectedly and sprayed about 6 bbls of a diluted mixture of 15% HCL 
and gel across the wellhead, crane and open top tanks. There were no injuries and the spill was cleaned up.  
 
The emergency response went well. The diluted acid was further neutralized by spraying it down with soda 
ash  and washed  into  the cellar where  it  was  vacuumed  up.  Material  Safety  Data  Sheets for  the chemicals 
were onsite. A post-incident safety stand down was held to discuss the lessons learned and an investigation 
was conducted. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The pressure relief valve that was used during this incident had been used in the past, but had been replaced 
with a newer design because the newer design relieves into a tank instead of to the atmosphere.  However, 
the  new  design  was  unavailable  at  this  location  so  the  contractor  used  the  older  valve  that  relieves  to 
atmosphere.  The  hazards  associated  with  potential  atmospheric  release  by  this  older  pressure  relief  valve 
were  recognized  during  the  Job  Safety  Analysis;  and  injuries  were  avoided  by  restricting  worker  access  to 
the area in which the relief valve might affect if it were to release.  
 
The  pressure  relief  valve  activated  unexpectedly  because  the  diesel  engine  that  provides  the  hydraulic 
pressure  ran  out  of  fuel.    The  diesel  engine  ran  out  of  fuel  because  the  crew  changed  in  mid-stage  and 
during the handover the fuel status was not communicated. This failure would have caused either the old or 
new pressure relief valves to release. The difference between the old and new pressure relief valve is that 
the newer design would have relieved into a tank whereas the older valve relieved to atmosphere. 
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1) 
2) 

Pre-Job Safety Analyses should continue to be standard operating procedure. 
In the future, shift changes will not take place mid-stage of a frac without extraordinary consideration 
and handover discussion. 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2011 

