Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 10 

IMPROPER USE OF SLEDGEHAMMER 
RESULTS IN A LOST TIME ACCIDENT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Employees  were  attempting  to  remove  a  valve  seat  from  a  mud  pump  module  that  was  to  be  used  as  a 
spare. The valve seat puller being used was damaged while trying to remove the valve seat and the welder 
heated the seat in an attempt to loosen it.  A sledgehammer was used to strike another sledgehammer face 
that  was  placed  on  the  valve  seat  in  an  attempt  to  loosen  and  remove  the  seat  when  a  piece  of  both  the 
valve  seat  and  sledgehammer  face  broke  off.    The  broken  piece  of  metal  from  the  sledge  hammer  face 
penetrated the leg of the employee who was standing approximately 9 feet (3 meters) away performing fire 
watch duties. 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Employees were not aware of the information in the company policy “Use of Hammers”, which prohibits 

  Employees failed to recognize the hazard and commenced the task.  Supervisors failed to stop the job 

striking one hammer face with another.   

and seek alternative means. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel and 
supervisors to do the following: 
 
1.  Review with all crews, the company policy on Use of Hammers. 
2.  Review  with  all  crews,  a  fatality  report  from  a  previous  incident  –  “Employee  Struck  by  Hammer 

Fragment”. 

3.  Conduct a “Hazard Hunt” with emphasis on the condition of hammer heads to ensure they are fit for use, 

not mushroomed and that hammer handles are in good condition 

4.  Review and amend all JSA’s associated with the use of sledgehammers to capture the company policy, 

and “Lessons Learned” document on a hammer incident. 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2011 

