Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 05 – 15  
 

IMPROPER USE OF IRON ROUGHNECK™  
TYPE EQUIPMENT RESULTS IN DAMAGE 

 
The lower jaw on the Iron Roughneck™ was being used to hold back up on a sub while the top drive was 
being used to spin-up the connection. This resulted in the full torque of the top drive spin-up function being 
transmitted to the tracks and wheels of the Iron Roughneck™.  The Iron Roughneck™ was not designed to 
be used as a back up to the top drive, but only as a back up to itself.  The torque applied to the track was 
sufficient to shear the hold down mechanism on the Iron Roughneck™ and dislodge it from the tracks.  There 
were no injuries. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. 

Improper work procedure.  The model of Iron Roughneck™ is use was not designed to back-up the top 
drive. The unit is designed to have reactive torque from the top wrench to the bottom wrench, not to hold 
the torque with the wheels. 
Insufficient training.  The crews on the rig were not fully trained in the limitations of the unit.  No 
organized training for operation of the specific model of Iron Roughneck™ was incorporated in the rig 
training. 

2. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 
Instructed all Operations Personnel To:   
 
1.  Review  this  incident  with  crews  and  emphasize  that  an  Iron  Roughneck™  is  designed  to  work  as  an 
independent unit and shall only be operated as designed.  ANY deviation from the designed use requires 
a completed formal risk assessment and an approved Management of Change. 

2.  All operators of the Iron Roughneck™ are required to review the operations and maintenance sections of 
the operations manual.  This must be included in the individual’s training record*.  Specific emphasis is to 
be placed on a through knowledge of the pre-operating checklist, end-of-stroke interlock, torque wrench 
back-up mode, and mouse hole operations.  

3.  All work procedures involving the use of the Iron Roughneck™ are to be reviewed by the drill crew for 

compliance to the operating procedure for that piece of equipment and their rig-specific JSA. 

 
This  Alert  applies  to  any  ”Iron  Roughneck™”,  type  system,  whether  it  is  on  tracks,  wheels,  or  hangs  on  a 
wire or arm.  
 
*Requirement  for  this  training  will  be  included  and  documented  in  the  Floorhand  position  in  Competency.  
Until  this  program  is  complete,  the Driller  must ensure  that  all operators  of  Iron Roughnecks™  and similar 
equipment are in compliance with Recommended Action #2. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2005 

