Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS – MAN LIFTED FROM DECK OF SUPPLY VESSEL 

 
ALERT 06 – 30 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED? 
 

Two 

deckhands 

Trash  bags  were  being  back  loaded 
from  the  Rig onto  the  deck  of  a  supply 
vessel. 
had 
disconnected  a  4-part  sling  from  the 
bag  and 
the  vessel’s  signalman 
(banksman)  gave  the  signal  to  the 
crane  driver  to  pick  up.    As  the  crane 
operator  picked  up,  a  Deckhand’s  foot 
became entangled in the sling’s tag line 
which  lay  coiled  on  the  deck.    As  the 
sling  was  being  raised  the  tag  line 
caught  the  man’s  foot  and  he  grabbed 
hold  of  the  tag  line  and  was  picked  up 
to a height of approximately 10-20ft (3 – 
6 meters) before the operation could be 
stopped. 
hand  was 
immediately set back down on the deck 
uninjured. 

deck 

The 

 
WHAT WERE THE PRIMARY CAUSES? 

Inadequate consideration and recognition of potential hazards.   

The deckhand was standing over a coiled tag line while the vessel’s Signalman (Banksman) gave the signal 
to the rig’s crane operator to pick up. Neither employee recognized the hazard. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: As a result of this incident, the following actions and directives were issued 
to rig and work boat personnel: 
 

•  Stress the need for a thorough and detailed pre-task risk assessment. 

•  Both Rig and vessel Risk Assessment processes to be revised to include additional hazards associated 

with working with taglines. 

•  Hold  safety  stand  downs  on  the  rig  and  on  the  vessel  to  review  the  incident  and  discuss  the  additional 

identified hazards of working with tag lines.  

•  Each supply vessel will have two empty trash skips placed onboard prior to departing shore base.  Trash 

bags will be loaded directly into skips on the rig. 

•  Arrange for deck crews to attend a five day rigging & lifting training school. 

•  Identify and provide taglines that will not coil. 

•  Communicate lessons learned to all other areas of operation. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2006 

