Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 03  
 

FLOORMAN STRUCK BY TONGS RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The drilling crew was tripping drill pipe out of the hole.  A Floorman who was working the pipe racker position 
was attempting to help with the tongs by pulling the breakout tongs back as the Driller rotated out each stand.  
This  went  on  for  two  hours.    The  floorman  was  called  away  to  help  with  another  task  and  upon  returning, 
continued to  work his pipe racking position.  When he returned hevi-wate  pipe was being pulled out of the 
hole.  The floorman again assisted with the break out tongs and when the Driller kicked in the rotary to back 
out the stand, the tongs snapped toward the injured to the length of the snub line, striking the floorman’s right 
arm,  and  throwing  him  into  the  racked  drill  pipe.    He  sustained  a  severe  bruise  to  his  right  arm  and  a  head 
laceration where he struck the racked pipe.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The process of breaking out stands of drill pipe and rotating out had gone on for two hours before the incident.  
The  hevi-wate  pipe  sits  heavier  in  the  stump  than  drill  pipe  and  will  rotate  the  tongs  around  quickly  when 
backing up.  Standard drill pipe will act the same if the Driller is holding some string weight on the elevators.  
The  injured  employee  failed  to  take  corrective  action  as  regards  to  his  unsafe  work  position.    Also,  for  two 
hours, the crew and Driller had the opportunity to inform the person racking pipe that standing in the radius of 
the snub line of the breakout tongs is hazardous.  The same event is likely when backing into or rotating out a 
stand  of  drill  collars.    This  hazard  went  unrecognized  by  all  personnel  on  the  floor,  including  the  inured 
employee, or if recognized as a hazard by the co-workers, no one spoke up.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel:   
 
•  Don’t stand in the radius of the snub line of the make-up tongs 
•  There is no need to touch the tongs by the injured, except to help place the tongs on the pipe.  He should 

be standing out of the radius of the snub lines from the moment the slips are set. 

•  Although the Rig Manager is the Safety Supervisor and the Driller becomes the Safety Supervisor in the 
Rig Manager’s absence when an unsafe act takes place, it is the responsibility of the all personnel to take 
action to modify that behavior.  No matter who works or relieves on the floor in the pipe racking position.   
It is the Driller’s duty to explain the safe way to perform the task at hand and instruct personnel regarding 
hazardous positions on the rig floor.    

• 

 
 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to IADC APRG Section 3 for additional information. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued January 2003 

