Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 02  

DISREGARD FOR ENERGY ISOLATION 

PROCEDURES RESULTS IN AMPUTATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The derrick man was replacing a small hatch cover, which had been removed to clean out the auger on the 
horizontal  conveyor  in  the  sack room.   The conveyor  had backed  up due  to chemicals  absorbing  moisture 
because of the humidity and heat.  The chemicals blocked the operation of the auger and had to be “dug out” 
from the hatch cover by using a special tool fit for the job.  To determine that the auger was free, the auger 
was engaged and the derrick man observed it through the cleanout opening.  Once it was determined that 
the auger was operating properly, the derrick man decided to put the hatch cover back in place; however, he 
failed to shut down the auger with the E-stop prior to reinstalling the cover.  With the system still running he 
began to reinstall the cover, which resulted in his left index finger coming in contact with the rotating auger 
and resulting in his losing the tip of his index finger. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
 
  The derrick man did not follow the company permit to work and Lock Out/Tag Out procedures in place 

Improper hand and finger placement when fitting the cover back in place. 

  The cover did not have a handle for the derrick man to grip and reinstall the cover. 
  No  JSA  or  Risk  Assessment  was  conducted  for  the  job  because  he  stated,  “we’ve  always  done  it  this 

for the job. 

way.” 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2012 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel to: 
 
  Develop a JSA and risk assessment for this job. 
  Place signage at all augers “Work only performed under Permit to Work and Isolation Certificate”. 
  Place handles on all auger covers to remove and reinstall safely without hands near augers. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2012 

