Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

IMPROPER HAND PLACEMENT RESULTS IN AMPUTATION 

 
ALERT 14 – 16  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

 

The rig crew and a 3rd party company were running casing with a Casing Running Tool (CRT).  After running the casing 
to  the  curve  (kick-off  point),  the  slips  were  set,  the  elevators  were  removed,  and  the  CRT  was  lowered  to  fill  up  the 
casing.  As the CRT was nearing the top of the casing in the rotary, a 3rd party casing employee (IP or injured person) 
grabbed the top of the casing for leverage.  In an attempt to gain leverage, he placed part of his fingers inside the casing 
while pushing the elevator links out of the way with his other hand.  As the CRT was lowered, his fingers were trapped 
between the CRT and the casing resulting in the amputation of his fingertips. 
 

 

 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 

 

• 
• 

• 

 

• 

The 3rd party casing employee placed his hand into a pinch point for leverage.   
The 3rd party employee was a Short Service Employee (SSE) and was not recognized in the pre-task JSA as such 
prior to beginning the casing operation.  
The  slips  were  set  with  the  top  of  the  casing  low  to  the  floor  which  allowed  for  a  “convenient”  leverage  point  for 
employees working on the floor. 

•  With the slips set where the top of the casing was low to the floor, there was not enough room to allow the insertion 

of the CRT without removing the elevators. 

•  Crew positioning, while pushing the elevators and links back, minimized the Driller’s view. 
•  Wet weather conditions minimized the Driller’s view of the work area. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

 

The company instructed all rigs in the fleet to review and revise the rig specific JSAs to: 
•  Remind  all crew  members, including  rig  and  3rd party  contractors,  to  never  place  their  hands and  fingers  into  any 

pinch points, especially on top of pipe or casing that is being run in / out of the hole. 

•  During the pre-job safety meeting, the supervisor should question 3rd party personnel to determine their experience 

level / SSE status, and to remind all personnel to be more watchful over inexperienced personnel. 
For fill-up operations, set the slips high enough to keep personnel from being able to reach into the top of the casing 
for leverage.  

•  Setting the slips high should allow the CRT to be inserted into the casing without removing the elevators.  If this is 
not feasible, then other steps should be determined and communicated to identify the potential pinch points and to 
remind personnel to keep their hands and fingers clear. 

•  Keep the floor area around the casing clear of personnel when lowering the CRT. 
•  Whenever  conditions  (weather,  obstruction  by  personnel,  etc.)  minimize  the  view  of  the  work  area,  a  Stop  Work 

should be called to discuss the concerns and determine the steps to proceed more safely. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2014 

