 

 

 

 

 

 

SAFETY ALERTS 

ALERT 5 – 17    

CROWN SAVER FUNCTION TESTING 

WHAT HAPPENED OR COULD HAVE HAPPENED: 
The Driller operated the rig without confirming that the Crown Saver Device was properly set.  Therefore, 
there was a real chance that the travelling equipment could crown out, which, could result in parted drill 
line and dropped blocks. 
 
Drillers must avoid operating the rig without checking the Crown Saver Device. 
The consequences of crowning out can be catastrophic; including but not limited to, major equipment damage, 
serious injury, and/or death. 
 
WHAT WERE CONTRIBUTING FACTORS OR POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 
Drillers have impacted the crown by assuming the crown saver device was set and functioning properly 
ASSUMPTION IS A TERRIBLE WAY TO OPERATE! 
 
LESSONS LEARNED: 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Each tour, the Driller is expected to function test the crown saver by slowly picking up the 
drill string and running the drill line into the toggle of the crown saver. 
The drill line must trip the toggle. 
The crown saver must disengage the drawworks. 
If this does not happen, the crown saver device must be readjusted and/or repaired. 
The Driller will document the crown saver function test on the daily IADC Drilling Report. 
The Rig Manager will periodically verify the proper function tests by observing the 
procedure. 
Each Rig Manager will hold a stand-down meeting with every crew and communicate the 
information contained in this alert. 
Each Rig Manager will personally observe and verify that each Driller knows how to 
properly function test the crown saver device. (If procedure is not completely understood, the 
Rig Manager will do additional training with the Driller.) 

  A signed acknowledgement and understanding of an alert will be emailed to the 

Drilling Superintendent and HSE Personnel. 

  Drilling Superintendents and Field Safety Representatives will make sure that these 

expectations are being followed during regular rig visits. 
Failure to comply with these expectations can lead to injury and/or disciplinary actions. 

 

-A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or 

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

 

 

 

 

This toggle is not adjusted properly. It allows the drill line to pass underneath it. 
 

 

 

When adjusted properly, the toggle is contacted by at least the top half of the side of the drill line. 

 

 

2  

