Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 34 

FIRE STARTS FROM FALLING SLAG 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A Permit to Work (PTW) had been completed and JSA reviewed.  There was no fire blanket available so 
four  (4)  steel  plates  were  used  in  an  attempt  to  close  the  gap  between  the  conductor  pipe  and  the  rotary 
table.  A fire watch was stationed on each side of the pipe to spray water and cool the slag as the welders 
cut  off  the  padeyes,  but  there  was  no  fire  watch  in  the  moon  pool  area.    Ten  minutes  after  the  job  was 
completed, fire was spotted on the starboard moon pool walkway.  Slag had fallen through the table and was 
deflected about 6 meters (18 feet) onto a pile of plastic cable guards left against the bulkhead.  The plastic 
ignited but was quickly extinguished when the fire was discovered. 
 

 

  

Hot slag fell through the table. Some was deflected by the funnel 
 
(bell) and ignited a pile of plastic left about 6 meters away (right).  
 
The fire was immediately extinguished.  
  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Although attempts were made to ensure safety, they were incomplete and therefore did not prevent the 
incident. 
 
  The JSA did not list the potential for fire below, and there was no fire watch covering the moon pool area.  
  There was no fire blanket.  The plates did not adequately close the gap between the pipe and rotary.  
  Flammable materials were not recognized and removed: substandard housekeeping.   
  Failure to recognize the hazard of slag deflecting on the funnel below the table.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig personnel to update the welder’s burning JSA to address the risk of fire below the floor.  
The updated JSA is to include appointing a dedicated well-equipped fire watch at the moon pool. 
(Company JSA on Fire Prevention and Control; JSA on Welding, Cutting, Grinding and Burning.) 
Instructed rig supervisors to ensure a proper fire blanket is used to completely cover the gap between 
pipe and rotary. (Company Guide on Tools and Equipment.) 
Instructed rig personnel to properly store or dispose of unused (combustible) materials. (Company 
Guide on Housekeeping) 

 

 

  Remember the ABBI rule: for any hot work, monitor Above, Below, Behind and Inside before, during and 

after any hotwork job.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2009 

