Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 09  
 

TANGLED FALL ARREST CABLE RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A pipe screen was left in the drill pipe that was racked in the derrick board.  The derrickman could not free 
the screen, so the motorman went up to the derrick board with a tool to pry it out.  After prying it out, the pipe 
was  made  up  into  the  drill  string.    The  driller  started  to  lower  the  drill  string  into  the  hole  when  the 
motorman’s  retractable  fall  arrest  cable  became  entangled  with  the  safety  clamp  on  the  Kelly  hose.    The 
motorman  was  knocked  to  the  derrick  board  and  could  not  get  his  fall  arrest  cable  untangled.    Due  to  the 
weight and force of the blocks and top drive, the fall arrest cable parted and he fell 75’ (~23m) to the rig floor. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

motorman’s fall arrest cable. 

 

  The motorman was tied off to the crown fall device.  
  The driller engaged the blocks and top drive allowing the safety clamp on the Kelly hose to catch the 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

 

 

Instructed the driller that the blocks are not to be moved if the men on the derrick board are not tied 
off to a retractable fall arrest device on the derrick board.   
Instructed all employees to tie off to the derrick board when hoisted in to position and not to stay tied 
off to the fall arrest device attached to the crown when on the derrick board. 

 
 
IADC Note:  **Please refer to the IADC HSE Reference Guide on Personnel Hoisting Operations (Chapter 
19)  for  more  information.    See  the  IADC  Safety  Meeting  Topic  Book  Fall  Protection  Section,  Also  review 
IADC Safety Alerts:  98-25, 01-09, 04-04, & 04-26 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2012 

