Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 15-07  
 

POOR SITUATION AWARENESS/LINE OF FIRE INCIDENT RESULTS IN OSHA RECORDABLE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Two crew members on their first day back were hammering up bolts on nipple up. During the pre-job meeting the two 
men had anticipated getting hit with the hammer while holding the hammer wrench. As a defense they tied a 3’ long 
piece of rope around the hammer wrench so that one employee could hold a bind on it while the other man swung the 
hammer. As the two men worked their way around the stack the man holding the rope ended up in the line of fire as he 
pulled the rope. On one of the swings the hammer glanced off of the top of the hammer wrench. Before the employee 
could stop the forward momentum of the hammer, it made contact with the man holding the rope striking him in the 
mouth. This strike resulted in an injury that met the requirements of an OSHA Recordable.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
-Lack of situational awareness 
-IP in direct line of fire 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Culture/Process: Although having a good pre-job meeting and several Error-Likely Situations were anticipated and 
defenses were put in place this incident still occurred, we didn’t maintain good situation awareness while working our way 
around the stack. Employees should always be using situation awareness and have a questioning attitude. By doing so 
one or both of the men should have noticed that the short rope coupled with the angle that the man was pulling it placed 
him directly in the line of fire.  
Oversight: Key leaders should be checking in on employees work progress and watching to make sure all defenses are 
in place and adequate. Recently one of our Operators conducted a stand down on one of our rigs to help raise 
awareness of incidents caused by standing in the line of fire. We greatly appreciate the support of this Operator who was 
very open about the increase in incidents they have seen due to standing in the line of fire.  
Engineering:  Management is currently looking for a practical engineering defense that we can use to hold hammer 
wrenches and other tools correctly while keeping other employees out of the line of fire.  
  
This is a re-enactment and not a picture from the actual incident or rig! This picture is strictly a visual aid to 
show the line of fire one may find himself in during nipple up. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright  2015 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

be applied to their own situations and practices 

Issued July 2015 

