Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 03 – 49  
 

CHEMICAL BURN 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  crew  was  running  pipe  into  the  hole  and  drilling  fluid  came  out  of  the  pipe  as  they  ran  a  stand  in.    An 
employee reported to the Driller that he had drilling fluid splash onto his legs.  The Driller advised him to wash 
the area with water and to change clothes.  Prior to leaving location, at the end of tour, the employee reported 
to the Rig Manager who looked at the contacted area and noted some redness on the employee's legs, but it 
did not appear to him that chemical burns existed.  The employee left location after tour to go home and on his 
way, he felt increasing pain on his legs and went to an emergency room for treatment.  He was treated for first 
and  second  degree  burns,  received  pain  medication,  and  he  was  admitted  to  the  hospital  for  continued 
treatment of the chemical burns.  The drilling fluid contained calcium chloride. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
A Root Cause Analysis (RCA) was conducted and the Key Factors, which resulted in the incident along with 
Action Items to prevent recurrence, were addressed.   
 
1. 

Ineffective communication of operation/hazard.  Supervisors did not follow through with specific instruction 
to crew regarding PPE.  No MOC for change in operations JSA procedure was not followed; i.e. no 
specific JSA written 

2.  Employee  did  not  have  a  change  in  clothing.    Employee  orientation  did  not  include  having  a  change  of 

clothing handy 

3.  Because the hazard was not recognized, the employee was not wearing a slicker or chemical suit when 

the fluid came out of the pipe.  The well was not slugged adequately due to lack of material to do so.   

4.  Employee did not wash off the chemical properly.  Employee was told to change, but since he had never 
been burned with this chemical did not follow instructions fully.  In addition the crew was not experienced 
with this chemical and there was no JSA specific to the use of Calcium Chloride.   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
All  Districts,  Drilling  Superintendents,  should  review  the  Action  Items  and  conduct  surveys  on  their  rigs  to 
determine if similar conditions exist.  Based upon the survey results, they should develop an Action Plan for 
submission to their District Manager and / or District Superintendent to prevent recurrence. 
 
1.  Acton Item:  Develop a MOC for using calcium chloride solutions.  Reinforce to supervisors to follow up 

and ensure compliance with procedure developed from the MOC 

2.  Acton Item: Include a discussion in orientations with new hires about having a change of clothing handy. 
3.  Action Item:  Order enough fluid for slugging, prior to commencing the trip.  Remind driller and crew to be 

prepared for the unexpected.   

4.  Action Item: Write specific JSA to include MSDS review.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued December 2003 

