Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 18 
 

NEAR MISS – LOOSE CRANE RING BOLTS  

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A crane boom slew was jamming while lifting medium loads.  The boom, counterweight, winch, pedestal, lift 
cylinders and lower pedestal plate were removed for inspection.  The rig crew discovered 30 loose bolts with 
another 30% of the bolts sheared off from contact with the inspection hole as well as a grooved path cut into 
the  top  plate.    Bolt  holes  were  stressed  and  cracked  on  the  thin  walled  sides  and  bearings  and  rails  were 
badly worn. 
 

Cracked Wall in Ring: 

 

 
Outcome/Potential Outcome: 
 
Possible fatality and major equipment damage if there had been a total failure of the pedestal system. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

1.  The bolts may not have been properly torqued as per the crane OEM manual.   
2.  The Preventative Maintenance recommended by the manufacturer was not followed. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The  problem  was  identified  and  investigated  before  a  more  serious  situation  developed.    Lessons  were 
shared within the company to prevent a similar occurrence elsewhere.  A heightened awareness developed 
regarding the importance of Preventative Maintenance with this piece of equipment. 
 
The  crane  manufacturer  recommended  that  the  base  be  taken  apart  and  inspected  every  600  operating 
hours.  On  this  unit,  pedestal  bearing  base  bolts  should  have  lock-tite  placed  on  the  threads  then  the  bolts 
torqued to 460 ft-pounds when being assembled. 
 
Rig  Maintenance  personnel  were  instructed  to  follow  the  crane  manufacturer’s  recommended  preventative 
maintenance schedule.   
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2009 

