Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 08  

UNSECURED GUARD RESULTS IN MTO 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While  investigating  a  noise  coming  from  the  liner  of  mud  pump  #2,  the  Injured  Person  (IP)  picked  up  the 
pony rod cover for the port side pony rod (each pony rod has its own cover).  The liner cover dropped and fell 
inside the area where the pony rods are.  While the pump was still running, the IP tried to remove the cover 
and the pony rod pushed the cover, pinching his finger between the cover and the pump body.  The end of 
the right ring finger was pinched, breaking the skin and required stitches to close the wound. 

 

Pony Rod Cover Loose on top of the mud pump.  

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  A Shortcut was taken by attempting to remove the cover with the pump still running.  The pump should 

have been shut down, isolated, tested and then the cover safely removed.   

  The Step Back 5 X 5 was not followed. 
 

It was suggested that all Liner/Pony Rod covers be hinged along fluid end to permit them to be securely 
opened when safe access is needed. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed rig personnel to never put your hands close to moving parts or equipment, the IP was not 
aware of potential pinch points. 
Instructed rig personnel to never remove covers for moving parts while machinery is still in motion. 

 
  Rig personnel were instructed to review and understand company Energy Isolation standard. 
  All personnel were instructed to avoid taking short cuts there is always time to do the task safely. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2011 

