 
ALERT 09 – 19  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

Direct Causes 
 

 
Root Causes 
 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

OFFLOADING EQUIPMENT RESULTS IN 

 HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
In preparation to offload a container from a flatbed truck, an employee was sent to the top of the container to 
connect the lifting slings.  Shortly after this procedure started, instruction was given to the truck driver to back 
up a short distance to move closer (or more centered) to the crane.  As the truck proceeded to back up, the 
man on top  of the container had to  go  down onto one knee to  prevent  himself from loosing his balance or 
falling from the container. 
 

1.  Truck driver received signal to back up.  
2.  Truck driver backed up while the man was working on top of container. 

1.  (Work Direction)  Pre-job Briefing needs instruction.  Insufficient job preparation as the truck was not 

properly positioned in relation to the crane before beginning the task. 
(Communications)  Communication system needs improvement. 
(Work Direction)  Insufficient supervision.  Crew Teamwork needs instruction. 

2. 
3. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

1. 

Instructed rig personnel that direct supervision by a senior crew member must be established and 
maintained throughout all lifting procedures.  

2.  Established a procedure to be followed whereby all drivers of trucks carrying loads will set their 

3. 

brakes and exit the vehicle while lifting operations (and preparations) are ongoing.  
Instructed the job site supervisor to assign a specific signal person who will be wearing a colored 
vest.  

4.  The signal person will be identified in the pre-job safety meeting as the only one that signals will be 

received from.  

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2009 

