Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 27 
 

INCORRECT SLING APPLICATION RESULTS IN  

HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A 13 3/8” casing string had been run to the setting depth.  The last few joints were washed down using a 
third  party  circulating  head.    The  final  joint  to  be  run  was  a  15  foot  pup  joint,  however,  the  Company  Man 
instructed the crew to lay down the pup joint and pick up a full joint.  The circulating head was re-installed 
onto the full joint by the crew on the catwalk.  The joint was then made up and the hose connected.  As soon 
as the pumps were brought on line to 30 SPM, the circulating head blew off.  The web sling that was being 
used to secure the circulating head came unfastened and allowed the head to fall approximately 15m to the 
rig floor.  No one was injured. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The selection and application of the safety sling was incorrect.  A JSA was conducted, but the specific type 
of  safety  sling  to  be  used  had  not  been  identified.    The  third  party  supervisor  did  not  properly  install  or 
operate the equipment.  The incident occurred directly after crew change.  The oncoming crew did not take 
the  required  time  to  verify  the  equipment  was  properly  installed  and  secured.    The  circulating  head  had 
previously been used and was known to be in good working order.  It is therefore possible that because third 
party did not supervise the installation of the circulating head, the crew may have cross threaded it and as a 
result it blew off at a low pressure.  The weight of the circulating hose was not taken by an air winch which 
allowed the casing head to be unreasonably side loaded.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 
•  Training schedule made for on site rigging and slinging practice to include the proper use of wire rope 
slings,  shackles  and  winch  lines  to  secure  equipment  used  at  height  (Dropped  Objects  Management 
System). 

JSA revised to include proper use of securing sling and proper application. 

•  Rig  Managers  to  ensure  third  party  equipment  is  properly  installed,  secured  and  operated.  Third  party 

companies to comply with the above by having qualified personnel.  

•  Discussion with all Rig & Line Managers at the Monthly Rig Manager’s meeting shortly following incident.  
•  Line  management  to  ensure  distribution  of  incident  to  area  rigs;  understanding  and  compliance  of  the 

company’s RMS policies and procedures. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2007 

