Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 15 

NEAR MISS – DROPPED CASING WHEN 

ELEVATORS NOT LATCHED CORRECTLY 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A joint of 13 3/8 inch casing fell down the v-door and continued off the catwalk when the Single Joint Casing 
Elevators  (SJE)  were  not  latched  and  pinned  correctly.    The  incident  occurred  on  the  60th  joint  of  casing 
being run.  A check of the SJE after the incident verified that the elevators DID NOT FAIL and that the cause 
of  the  incident  was  induced  by  human  error.    The  investigation  team  established  that  the  SJE  were  only 
partially latched.  This left enough room to insert the pin behind the latching device instead of in its proper 
position in front of the latching device and acting as a retaining safety pin. The safety retainer pin was still 
inserted after the incident.  The latcher on the rig floor did not know the elevators were not fully latched. 
 
With the winch line and sling removed from the joint of casing the driller was signaled to pick up the casing.  
When the weight was taken up on the SJE under the collar of the casing the SJE opened and the casing fell 
out and eventually came to rest against the wire line unit off the catwalk. 
 
The consequence of this incident was slight damage to the wire line unit with the potential for a fatality.  

Elevators after the incident.  Note the safety 
pin still in the elevators.   

Recreation:  Note the latch partially closed 

with pin incorrectly inserted. 

 

 

 

 

Location of the casing after the incident. 

Correct latching and pinning of elevators.  

Note pin outside elevator latch. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
-  The  driller  was  not  able  to  see  the  casing  on  the  v-door  or  the elevators  from  the  drillers  console.    His 
vision was obstructed by four stands of 8 inch Bottom Hole Assembly (BHA) and four rows of drill pipe, 
which was stacked in the drillers side of the fingers because the off driller side was full of drill pipe.  The 
driller relied on “thumbs up” to pick up on the blocks. 
It is not possible for the latch to open on the SJE if latched and pinned correctly.  It is possible to not fully 
latch the SJE allowing sufficient room to insert the retainer pin behind the latch. 

- 

-  There was no second person assigned to check if the SJE were latched and pinned correctly. 
-  The  JSA,  which  was  reviewed  prior  to  commencement  of  the  job,  was  a  generic  JSA  and  made  no 

reference to the hazard of the elevators not latching or the requirement for a second checker.  

-  The rig was not equipped with any form of secondary safety device (i.e. stopper bar at the base of the v-

door) to prevent casing etc. from sliding down the v-door through the catwalk as it did in this case.  

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
-  Single Joint Elevators were changed out for a type considered to have a better latching device (i.e. pin 

inserted through latch). 

-  Procedures to be reviewed and amended so that 

o  A second person is assigned to double check the elevator is latched correctly and the pin is inserted 

o  Driller  must  have  a  clear  view  to  the  v-door  at  all  times.    Where  racking  pipe  in  the  fingers  will 
prevent  this  the  pipe  should  be  racked  differently  to  allow  a  clear  view  or  they  should  be  laid  out 
sideways when this is not achievable. 

-  A rig specific JSA is to be developed which outlines all the potential hazards identified in the investigation 

correctly. 

report. 

-  A stopper device design is to be agreed by Management which, when fabricated and fitted, will prevent 
pipe or casing travelling down the catwalk uncontrollably if there was any future elevator failure or human 
error. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

