Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 18  
 

BODY POSITIONING NEAR SUSPENDED LOAD RESULTS IN MEDICAL 

TREATMENT CASE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A member of the rig crew was assisting with breaking down the BOP assembly during a rig move.  He was 
standing under the substructure holding a cable out of the way while the choke lines were being removed out 
from under the substructure by  the forklift.  Once the choke lines  became free, they swung in his  direction 
and  knocked  his  feet  out  from  under  him.    The  injured  employee  was  seen  at  the  local  hospital  where  he 
received minimal treatment.  X-rays taken of his shoulder revealed a small fracture within the rotator cuff of 
the left shoulder. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  Positioning.  The injured person was standing in the path of the choke line while it was being removed 

out from under the substructure. 

•  The injured person had his hands on a suspended load. 
•  Poor communication between the injured person and the employee operating the forklift. 
•  Complacency. The task was considered routine therefore the crew members involved with this task did 

not recognize the potential hazards associated with this task. 
In  this  case  neither  the  injured  person  nor  the  employee  operating  the  forklift,  communicated  with  one 
another as to what the hazards are and how they can be prevented. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The crews were reminded that a Job Safety Analysis (JSA) for this particular task and any task involving 

the handling/removal of any suspended load should be reviewed, created and or updated.   

•  All employees were instructed to use a tag line to maneuver any suspended loads.  Tag lines are used to 

keep an employee out of the line of fire while dealing with moving objects and any suspended load.  

•  All crew members must remain in constant communication during every task.  Communication can be 

visible as well as verbal.   

•  All employees were reminded that complacency can be a killer.  No job is ever so important that we 

cannot take the time to perform the job safely.   

•  All employees were reminded that it is everyone’s right and responsibility to utilize the company’s “Stop 

Work Authority” policy. 

•  The company reminded all employees that no matter the significance of any task, crew members must 
make every effort to complete the task safely.  Crew members are expected to recognize such hazards 
as this (the injured employee standing in the path of the suspended load and the injured person using his 
hands to guide the load rather than using a tag line). When such activities are taking place it is 
everyone’s responsibility to step in and stop the job.  Safety should never be compromised. 

• 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued July 2013 

