Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

ALERT 05 – 17  

NEAR MISS – ELEVATOR FAILURE  

 

 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
 
A serious near miss occurred recently while laying down 3.5” tubing 
on  an  offshore  rig.  This  incident  could  have  been  avoided  if  a 
simple safety device was installed in the elevator hinge pin.  The rig 
employee operating the air hoist lifted a joint of 3.5” tubing from the 
mouse hole using a single joint elevator. After installing the thread 
protector and while laying down the tubing, the elevator struck the 
top  of  the  V-door.  The  hinge  pin  was  knocked  out  of  the  elevator 
hinge, the hinge opened and the tubing slid down the V-door along 
the catwalk and came to rest on the main deck. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  A safety device (lock ring) was not installed in the hinge pin.  
2.  The elevator failed because a safety device was not installed.  
3.  The elevator struck the V-door because the operator was 

inexperienced or inattentive or there was inadequate supervision.  

Hinge Pins 

 

Note – No locking pin 

 

 
A pre-job safety meeting should have included an inspection of the equipment and identified striking the V-
door as a hazard. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1.  Safety devices should be recognized in the pre-job deployment stage.  The 3rd party contractor did have 
an  inspection  check  for  the  hinge  pin  but  there  were  no  specifications  for  the  inspection  (NDT)  and 
nothing about the lock-ring.  Note:  The single joint elevators have two hinges and therefore two hinge 
pins.    Of  the  two  sets  on  location  (one  backup)  three  of  the  four  lock-rings  were  missing.    This  is  an 
omission by the 3rd party contractor.  
If additional supervision is needed on the rig floor when multi-tasking, then it should be clearly identified 
in the JSA and supervision should be provided.  

2. 

3.  Rig Supervisors are to inspect all elevators delivered to the rig to ensure safety devices are fitted.  
4.  Pressed  hinge  pins  may  be  considered,  however  only  the  exposed  sections  of  this  type  can  be  non-

destructively tested.  

5.  Rig Site Management along with the Safety Officer must ensure that JSA’s are carried out seriously and 

then executed according to the steps. 

 
Conclusion: 
 
This  incident  could  have  been  avoided  if  a  simple  safety  device  was  installed  in  the  elevator.    Pre-
deployment  and  onsite  checklists  are  designed  to  prevent  such  incidents.  Although  not  the  cause  of  the 
incident,  the  inexperienced  or  inattentive  air  hoist  operator  was  a  contributing  factor.  The  JSA  if  done 
properly should have identified the V-door as a potential hazard. The investigation is ongoing with the third 
party contractor to determine root cause of the incident. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2005 

