Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 14 
 

RIG MOVE – ROTARY TABLE FELL OFF TRUCK 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  rig  move  a  subcontractor  truck  was  loaded  with  the  rig’s  rotary  table  which  weighs  approximately 
eight tons.  It was secured to the truck with four boomer type chain binders.  At 70 km (43 miles) from the old 
location and 500 meters (1640 feet) before entering the gate to the new location, one of the chain binders 
broke  which  allowed  the  other  three  chain  binders  to  loosen.    The  rotary  table  fell  off  the  right  side  of  the 
truck and hit the black top causing damage to the road surface.  The rotary table skid took all the impact and 
will be inspected before being back into service. 

 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  Failure to check the securing devices prior to the vehicle leaving the old location. 
 
  Excessive speed caused the load to shift. 
 

Incorrect chain binder “boomer type” was used to secure the load.  

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 
 

Instructed rig movers to use “ratchet type” binders. 
Instructed rig supervisors and truck pushers that no truck is to leave the location without the load being 
secured properly and then checked by the truck pushers. 

  Ensure that trucks travel at a safe speed for the road conditions.  Discussion of road conditions and safe 
driving speed based on those conditions should be included in the pre-move safety meetings held every 
morning with the truck drivers.  This discussion is to be documented. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2010 

