Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 

 
ALERT 04 – 40 
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

STABBING BOARD INCIDENT RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

Rig Worker Position Prior to Incident 

While a joint of casing was being hoisted into the 
derrick, the rig’s traveling block contacted and 
dislodged the stabbing board platform causing it to fall.  
A rig worker standing on the stabbing board platform 
also fell, hitting the rig floor after his safety belt lanyard 
parted.  He subsequently died. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The recently designed and installed stabbing board 

platform provided inadequate clearance for the 
traveling block to safely pass by. 

•  The stabbing board platform was not secured 

directly to the derrick, even though safety pins were 
clearly visible and easily accessible. Instead, the 
platform was held in place by a chain-supported 
hook that had no safety latch.  

•  The rig worker’s safety belt did not have a shock-
absorbing lanyard.  A proper safety body harness 
with this feature was readily available on the rig 
floor. 

•  There was a failure to address Management of 

Change (MOC).  no MOC process was used for the 
design, fabrication and installation of the stabbing 
board platform. 

Traveling 

block 

Stabbing board 

platform 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives: 
 
•  Rig managers and supervisors are to ensure proper safety devices are utilized --- obsolete equipment 
should be removed from service (safety belts without shock-absorbing lanyards, hooks without safety 
latches). 

• 

Inspection and auditing activities should include a review of the company’s Management of Change 
(MOC) processes and associated documentation ---  

 
IADC Note:  In the re-enactment photo, the man is holding onto the drilling lines.  This is an unsafe practice 
as a person’s hands could get caught in the blocks as they pass by the board.  See Alerts:  00 – 11 and 00 – 
32. 
Revised 20 October 2004. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2004 

