Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 22  

FAILURE OF BOP RAM YOLK 

RESULTS IN A NATURAL GAS RELEASE FROM BOP 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A rigless snubbing unit was preparing to stage a production tubing string into a well.  The average well bore 
pressure was recorded at 28mPa (4000 psi).  At that pressure it is required to snub the tubing using the ram 
to ram staging method.  As the snubbing operator was staging the coupler of joint #44 into the staging 
chamber of the snubbing unit, he closed the lower stripping Quick Ram Change (QRC) rams, de-pressurized 
the chamber, and opened the upper stripping QRC rams.  Immediately after the upper QRC rams were 
opened there was a natural gas release from the closed annular blowout preventer (BOP) on top of the 
snubbing stack.  The operator closed the upper QRC rams and investigated the cause of the release.  It was 
noticed that the lower stripping QRC rams had malfunctioned and did not close properly.  The operating yoke 
of the QRC stripping ram was found to be broken on the left side.  This made it impossible to apply the 
correct closing pressure to the QRC stripping pipe ram to achieve a seal on the tubing.  The tubing hanger 
was staged in using the upper stripping QRC rams and the damaged QRC rams were removed from the 
snubbing stack and sent for analysis of the failure.  
 
The BOP involved in the incident was within its 3 year required certification, having been inspected 1.5 years 
ago by a third party recertification facility.  No damage or irregularities were detected. 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The immediate cause of the incident was the failure of the operating yoke on the QRC BOP.   
  The original purchaser of the rams had requested the manufacturer to modify the original equipment 

design to improve overall ease of handling, as well as, rigging in and rigging out of the BOP.   

  The underlying causes of the failure included a faulty design that did not account for the conditions 

the QRC BOP was being used.   

  A  full  management  of  change  review  was  not  conducted  prior  to  the  changes  made  to  the 
equipment and assumptions were made about the strength and durability of the operating yoke and 
QRC. 

 

 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Prior to commencing operations a safety meeting was held and a review of the company’s ram to ram 
staging Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was completed.  These actions were documented with all personnel 
on location. 
 

  The company has 6 sets of the faulty QRC BOPs and all were upgraded with new, heavier yokes.  The 

yokes that were removed from service were sent for Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) and it was 
discovered that they were ALL cracked in the same spot. 

  Recommended that snubbing operators add a visual inspection of BOP components to the supervisor’s 

daily checklist. 

  Recommended that snubbing operators utilize original equipment manufacturer (OEM) or an OEM 

approved vendor for BOP service and recertification. 

  All companies that purchase remanufactured equipment must not take for granted that all designs are 

flawless and to ensure that a management of change process is developed and followed when any 
changes are made to equipment or processes. 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2011 

