Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 21  
 

LACK OF COMMUNICATION RESULTS IN MULTIPLE INJURIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The crew was in the process of laying down drill pipe.  A joint was pulled out of the hole, the slips were set, 
the tongs were attached to the top and bottom of the tool joint and the connection was broken.  The bottom 
set of tongs were removed and the Driller engaged the rotary to spin out the connection.  The breakout tongs 
were left on the upper joint to keep the blocks from rotating and tangling the lines.  As the rotary engaged, 
the crew did not notice that the breakout tongs slid down below the tool joint to the pipe in the rotary.   The 
break-out  tong  hand  made  the  tongs  bite,  as  he  had  prior,  thinking  that  they  were  on  the  top  joint.    At  the 
same time, the injured employee reached into the Red Zone to grab the tail rope on the back handle of the 
tongs  to  help  pull  the  tong  around.    As  he  reached  in,  the  tongs  bit  on  the  pipe  in  the  rotary  and  swung 
around striking the employee in the chest knocking him back into the laydown post which was in the mouse 
hole.  He then fell forward, landing face first on the floor.  The employee sustained multiple injuries.  Quick 
responses  by  the  crew,  and  the  medical  team  upon  their  arrival  to  the  site  prevented  more  serious 
complications. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

the rotary table. 

 

It was an accepted practice to rotate the pipe out when they were in the upper part of the hole, so the 
crew did not use the pipe spinner. 

•  The Driller did not make sure that the tongs were set and bit into the top joint of pipe prior to engaging 

•  The crew did not recognize and correct the hazard which was created when the tongs slid down the pipe 

(i.e., they did not call “Stop the Job”). 

•  The  employee  placed  himself  in  a  dangerous  area  by  entering  /  reaching  into  the  “Red  Zone”  for  a 

pullback rope tied onto the back of the tongs to assist another employee in making the tongs bite. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  The company instructed the Drilling Superintendents and Rig Managers to discuss with their Drillers that 
the  practice  of  rotating  out  of  the  hole  is  no  longer  acceptable.    ONLY  the  following  exceptions  are 
acceptable: 
o  Working the Bottom Hole Assembly – slow rotation of the rotary table is acceptable, as long as it is 

safe to do so, to assist in breaking out or making up the BHA; Rig Manager MUST be present.  

o  Equipment Failure – if the pipe spinner fails, and it is deemed critical to continue coming out of the 
hole, the rotary table may be utilized ONLY with full up-line (up to and including the Vice-President) 
approval prior to continuing. 

•  The Drillers were instructed that they must make sure that the tongs are set and bit into the correct tool 
joint prior to breaking out or making up a tool joint.  In the event that an exception has been granted to 
use  the  rotary  table  for  rotating  out  drill  pipe,  the  Driller  MUST  ensure  that  the  breakout  tongs  are  in 
place on the top tool joint and that personnel are in the “safe zone” PRIOR to engaging the rotary table.   
•  All personnel involved a task were reminded that they must always be on watch for hazards and “Stop 
the  Job”  when  a  hazard  is  recognized  (prior  or  during  an  operation).    Once  the  hazard  is  eliminated  / 
controlled, then operations may resume. 

•  All personnel were reminded of the dangers of reaching into the RED ZONE. 
•  The Rig Managers and Drillers  were instructed to verify that pull back ropes are removed from manual 

tongs. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2012 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2012 

