Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
 
ALERT 04 – 30 
 

ELECTRICAL TROUBLESHOOTING INCIDENT  

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  problem  was  experienced  with  a  main  engine-cooling  pump.    The  electrician  was  asked  to  check  the 
electrical  supply  to  the  cooling  pump  motor.    The  electrician  opened  the  Motor  Control  Center  panel  and 
proceeded  to  check  the  fuses  with  his  multi-meter  on  the  Ohms  scale.    During  his  tests  the  probe  from  the 
meter shorted across fuses 2 and 3 causing flash burns to the electricians hands; it also blacked out the rig 
due to consequential reasons. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The MCC panel inter-lock was faulty causing the cubicle to remain live after the door was opened.  
•  The electrician did not prove the electrical supply “DEAD” prior to working in the cubicle. 
•  The electrician did not adhere to the Try section of Lock, Tag and Try. 
•  The electrician did not review the appropriate JSA for the task. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following action items: 
 
1.  All  electricians  are  to  make  sure  that  the  Electrical  Procedures  section  in  the  company  preventative 

maintenance manual is reviewed and understood.  

2.  Electricians are to make sure that electrical JSAs reflect the content of the Electrical Procedures section. 

(With specific regard to “PROVING DEAD” prior to starting work).  

3.  Electricians to make sure the JSAs are reviewed prior to starting work.  
4.  Electricians are to use fused and shrouded test leads to avoid short circuit risks.  
 
It is the responsibility of the Rig Manager/OIM to make sure that any Master JSA affected by this Alert is 
updated.  The Rig Manager/OIM will also make sure that the information in this Alert is provided immediately 
to all personnel, and that it will be included as a topic at the next regularly scheduled Safety Meeting.  If the 
Alert is safety or environmentally critical to the present operation, the OIM will call a special Safety Meeting to 
cover the topic with all personnel. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2004 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued July 2004 

