Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 04 
 

BLOCKS FALL TO RIG FLOOR AFTER DRILL LINE CAME OFF OF THE  

DRAWWORKS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While rigging down the bridle assembly, the Driller was slacking off on the blocks in an attempt to lower the 
blocks and the bridle equalizer to the rig floor.  In the process, the drilling line “dog knot” was pulled from the 
drum.  This allowed the blocks to free-fall approximately 20 feet (6 meters), striking the rig floor.  During the 
free-fall, the “dog knot” was hung up in the braces and the fast line sheave, keeping the blocks from falling 
completely onto the floor.  Fortunately there were no injuries. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

•  The drill line came off the drawworks drum, pulling the “dog knot” free. 
•  The JSA / Work Plan for rigging up the drill line / drawworks did not address specific requirements for the  
minimum number of wraps on the drum at all phases of operation; the information was available in the 
top dog house. 

•  The crew failed to assemble an adequate amount of drilling line wraps on the drum to allow the blocks to 

reach the floor. 

•  The Driller and Rig Manager did not inspect the drum to ensure that the required number of wraps were 

placed on the drum prior to commencing the operations.     

•  The Driller did not pay attention to the drum while lowering the blocks to the drill floor. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company revised the JSA / Work Plan for rigging up the drill line for all phases of operations to 

include a reminder to verify the number of wraps before commencing operations, and communicated to 
all crew members; the information shall be readily accessible in the top dog house. 

•  The crew was reminded of their responsibility in verifying the number of wraps on the drum when rigging 

up and / or slipping drill line. 

•  The company instructed the Rig Manager to verify that the correct number of wraps were on the drum.  
They were also instructed to verify the correct number with the rig specific requirement and agree that 
the drill line wraps are adequate prior to commencing hoisting operations with the drawworks. 

•  The Drillers were reminded of their responsibility to watch the drum as the blocks are lowered to make 

sure the line does not spool off the drum. 

•  Additionally, the company suggested that a sign be placed in a conspicuous place (drawworks or other 

visible area) reminding the Driller and crew to check the number of wraps on the drum: 

o  Before Raising/Lowering the Mast 
o  After Rig Up and Before Lowering the Block to the Floor 
o  After Picking Up the Top Drive 
o  Before Laying Down the Top Drive 
o  After Cut and Slip 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2014 

