Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 25 
 

UNPROTECTED FLYWHEEL RESULTS IN A FATALITY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Note:    Although  this  incident  did  not  occur  on  a  drilling  rig  or  at  a  service  yard,  it  is  included  in  the  alerts 
program because there is a potential for it to occur anywhere.  A container containing a generator system was 
placed  on  the  platform  to  provide  power  for  testing  some  winches.    The  engine  was  fluctuating  so  a 
Mechanical  Assistant  and  the  two  Motormen  went  into  the  container  to  investigate.    It  was  decided  that  the 
engine  needed  to  be  shut  down  to  change  the  filters.    The  Motorman  stayed  by  the  filters,  while  the 
Mechanical  Assistant  returned  to  the  panel  to  ask  the  other  Motorman  to  fetch  new  filters.    While  the 
Mechanical assistant left the control panel and went outside to tell the winch crew to stabilize the winches, the 
Motorman  who  stayed  in  the  generator  container  decided  to  remove  his  jacket.    As  soon  as  the  Deck 
Electrician heard a noise in the container he went to investigate and found the injured setting against the fan 
guard. His jacket wound into the unguarded balance wheel pulley assembly.  The Motorman had his left hand 
amputated and suffered a skull fracture.  He passed away after 15 days in the hospital.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The investigation reveled that in preparation for the 
filter  change,  the  injured  person  had  partially 
removed  his  jacket,  releasing  his  right  arm  first.  
The suction created by the fan pulled the free part 
of  the  jacket  into  the  unguarded  balance  wheel 
pulley  assembly.    One  of  the  main  causes  of  the 
accident  could  be  considered  to  be  the  improper 
guarding of the pulleys and belt.  
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following or instructed personnel to:   
 
•  Performed a verification of all on board equipment and machinery in regards to Machinery Guarding or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Machinery Protection of rotating and moving parts.   
Installed protective devices to the rotating parts on the generator and engine as necessary. 

• 
•  All inspection operations beyond the control panel must have a stand-by person in attendance within the 

immediate area of the emergency stop and in a position to easily see the inspection operators. 

•  Ensure the emergency stop is immediately accessible to a stand-by person. 
• 

Instructed workers that working alone is not allowed inside the auxiliary generator container when working 
beyond the control panel or activities require working/inspection while the engine is in operation.  
Installed protective devices for the hot surfaces (i.e. exhaust manifold) of the engine that may come into 
contact with operators.  
Installed safety signs at the entrance of the containers, such as “Authorized Person only”, “Hearing 
Protection required”, and the normal PPE requirements. 

• 

• 

•  The company also instructed their Safety dept. to ensure that also all the normal operations are assessed 

and JSAs are available. 
The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued June 2003 

