Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 35 
 
 

  DROPPED STANDS OF DRILL PIPE RESULT IN INCIDENTS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the rig crew was tripping drill pipe into the hole the derrickman missed latching a stand of 3½” drill pipe 
and it was dropped across the derrick.  In an effort to return the stand to the derrick man, the floor crew used 
the driller’s side rig floor winch.  They wrapped the winch’s cable around the stand, anchored it to the rig floor 
near the V-door opening and began to pull it back to the derrickman.  As the stand was being pulled back 
toward the derrickman, it slid or lifted up and went out the v-door, falling to the yard below.  

Previously on another rig while the rig floor winch line was being used to pull back a stand, the rig floor crew 
gathered around the stand to push it toward the derrickman.  As the winch operator operated the winch to 
pull on the stand, the pin end of the missed stand was lifted off the rig floor by the winch cable.  The winch 
operator slacked off the line quickly to avoid lifting it further.  The stand of pipe came down on the foot of a 
rig floor crewman just behind his steel toe, cutting off three toes.  

On another rig as the winch line was pulling the dropped stand back, the line tension caused the stand to 
whip back striking the tip of the derrickman’s board.  The derrick board flipped up and struck the 
derrickman’s leg breaking it.   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The procedure for pulling back a dropped stand was inadequate.   
  No JSA had been performed to define the hazards of the task or explain how to address them.  
  When a stand is dropped, the rig floor winch is generally used to pull it back to the derrickman.  
  No consideration was given to the movement of the pin end of the stand of drill pipe.   
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  A safety meeting was held immediately after each incident and the procedures were reviewed. 
  The  Operations  Managers  on  the  projects  met  with  the  crews  emphasizing  the  company  policy  that 
anyone can stop the job if a hazard is perceived.  The same was done for all other rig crews within the 
division.  
Instructed  rig  personnel  that  before  attempting  to  pull  back  a  dropped  (lost)  stand  hazards  must  be 
discussed.   
Instructed rig personnel on three things to consider when performing this task:  
1.  To prevent the bottom of the stand from moving, tie off the bottom of the stand to other stands in the 

 

 

derrick with a length of chain.   

2.  Whip the winch line wraps around the stand to make the wraps travel up the stand before pulling with 
the winch.  This will place the center of pull on the stand nearer the top, reducing the tendency to lift 
the  stand.    In  other  words,  if  the  winch  line  is  placed  properly,  the  top  of  the  stand  will  be  moved 
toward the board rather than the entire stand being lifted up.  

3.  Rig  floor  personnel  should  not  be  anywhere  near  the  pin  end  of  the  stand  when  the  winch  is 

operated to pull the stand back to the board.  

 

 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2009 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
  Message  to  all  rig  supervisors:    This  is  a  non-standard  operation  yet  pulling  back  a  dropped  stand 
seems to happen often.  Develop a JSA for pulling back a dropped stand and discuss this JSA before 
performing this task.  To help recognize the hazards of a job, everyone should be asking themselves and 
each other, “what can potentially go wrong with this job.”  Communicate the hazards with one another in 
a pre-job safety meeting and address how the hazards can be avoided or eliminated.   

 
IADC Note:  At a Safety Engineering by Design Sub-Committee meeting one member discussed their use of 
a  “Dropped  Pipe”  pull  back  line.    See  the  following  pages  describing  this  company’s  procedure  and  cable 
design.    Note  this  is  not  an  IADC  Recommended  practice,  but  one  company’s  effort  to  make  pulling  back 
dropped (lost) stands of drill pipe safer.   

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2009 

 

 
1.3 

 
1.4 

 
1.5 

 
1.6 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

LOST PIPE RECOVERY SYSTEM 

 

 

 
IADC Note:  The following information was previously shared with the IADC HSE Committee’s Safety 
Engineering by Design Sub-Committee.  This is not an IADC recommended practice, but a sharing of 
how one company addressed the issue of recovering dropped drill pipe.   
 
1.1 
 
1.2 

Use  a  shackle  to  secure  the  end  of  the  70’  length  of  wire  rope  to  a  stationary  location  on  the 
derrickman’s side of the rig floor.  (See detail “A”) 

Refer to the attached drawing of the Lost Pipe Recovery System.   

Secure the live end of the rig floor winch line to the D-ring attached to the end of the 70’ length of 
wire rope by the use of a shackle. (See detail “A”) 

Next loop the five foot length of chain which is on the D-ring assembly around the lost stand of pipe 
and secure it to the D-ring (the chain will now encircle the pipe and both ends of the chain will be 
attached to the D-ring)  

Raise the air hoist line while making sure the chain slides up the stand (just past the second tool joint 
connection) until the cable is in tension. (See “Position #1”) 

Slowly  increase  the  tension  on  the  winch  line  and  gently  pull  the  stand  of  pipe  back  to  the 
Derrickman.  (See “Position #2 and Detail “B”)  

 
 
 
 
Note1:  The seventy (70) feet length of wire rope is required when pulling back a lost stand containing three 
average length joints of Range Two (2) drill pipe (27 – 30 feet).  Rigs operating with stands of fewer joints or 
Range 1 or Range 3 drill pipe will need to adjust the length of the wire rope they order.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2009 

 

 

 

