Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
ALERT 05 – 32 
 

NEAR MISS – DROPPED OBJECTS – UNSECURED 

MARINE RISER INSERTS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The driller was using the top drive system to pick up a 50-foot slick pup joint of marine riser from the raised 
catwalk.  When the riser reached an angle of about 30 degrees, two riser inserts fell about 15 to 20 feet to 
the drill floor.  The pup joint was lowered back to the deck.  No one was injured when the riser inserts fell. 
 

The 23-pound inserts should be held in place by circlips.  When the riser joints are made up, the riser bolts 
screw  into  the  inserts,  connecting  the  joints  together.    The  riser  joints  had  recently  had  an  annual  MPI 
inspection by a third party inspector.  The inserts and circlips were removed for the inspection.  The inserts 
were reinstalled: the riser protector was then put in place.  The riser was not inspected prior to picking it up 
from the deck to the catwalk as the riser is taken directly from the riser rack to the catwalk using the gantry 
crane.  Upon inspection, it was found that the other four inserts had no circlips installed to hold the inserts in 
place.   

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1.  During the inspection of the riser the supervisor was involved in and supervising several jobs at the same 

 

 

time. 

2.  There was a breakdown in communication or lack of information between the men cleaning and 

inspecting the riser and the individual or individuals reinstalling the inserts at the time of the inspection. 
3.  The JSA for picking up and running the riser did not state that the inserts should be checked to be sure 

they are secure before picking up each joint from the catwalk.  

4.  The drill crew thought the inserts were secure and therefore didn’t inspect them before picking the riser 

up from the catwalk. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2005 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS: To address this incident, this company issued the following: 
 
1.  Revise the JSA for running of riser to include inspection on the catwalk of all riser inserts to verify that 

the circlips are installed and the inserts are secure.  

2.  Revise  the  maintenance  plan  for  annual  the  MPI  inspection  of  riser  inserts  to  include  a  checklist  and 
sign-off  by  a  responsible  person,  such  as  the  OIM  or  Subsea  Engineer,  to  show  that  the  circlips  have 
been installed for each riser joint. 

3.  Ensure  that  supervisors  are  not  over-tasked,  and  if  they  are,  add  additional  supervisory  support  to 

ensure that the proper level of task supervision is provided. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2005 

