Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 31 
 

THUMB INJURY RESULTS IN LTI 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Due  to  a  malfunction  the rig  crew was  instructed  to  lay  down  the Measurement  While  Drilling  (MWD)  tool.  
The make-up tong was placed around the mud motor and latched.  The break-out tong was placed around 
the MWD tool and an attempt was made to latch the tong when the injured person (IP) placed in the thumb of 
his right hand between the lever and the long jaw of the tong.  His thumb was caught between the jaw and 
tong body, removing the flesh from the end of his thumb.  The removed flesh could not be reattached and the 
bone had to be amputated and the stump of the thumb sewn closed. 
 

 

  

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
This situation was a repeat of an incident that resulted in a lesser injury three months previously. 
The prior incident involved the same crew as this incident.  Following the prior incident, several safety 
meetings, refresher training and pre-job meetings addressed the topic of hand and finger safety. Prior to this 
incident, hand safety was discussed at the pre-tour meeting, a pre-job meeting and reminders and guidance 
was provided by the Rig Manager who was on the brake at the time.  
 
Other points of note include: 
 
•  The IP knew he had his hand in the wrong position. 
•  The IP had 1.5 years of experience working on the rig floor. 
•  The rig is fitted with an Iron Roughneck resulting in the crews being less familiar with manual tongs (only 

used when running Bottom Hole Assembly) 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
The following learning/corrective actions have been identified and implemented: 
 
•  Awareness:  All personnel will attend further refresher/awareness training on hand and finger hazards. 
•  Communication:  Effective communication is essential for safe operations.  If there are any doubts or 

misunderstandings, ask for clarification. ASK first, ACT later. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  Procedure/Work Instruction:  Where there is a history of deviation from work instructions or 

procedures or instructions are not followed, an assessment into the person’s suitability for the position 
will be undertaken. 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued September 2008 

