Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 16 
 

USE OF AN IMPROPER TOOL RESULTS IN HAND INJURY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig activity at the time of the incident was pulling out of the hole and laying down 16” BHA.  The drill crew 
was up to the Near Bit Reamer (NBR).  The rig crew started to retrieve the float from the NBR which was still 
in  the  elevators.    A  floor  crewman  had  a  hex  wrench  with  a  13-5/8”  3mm  ring  gasket  welded  onto  it  and 
hooked it into the float to act as a puller. 
 
The  derrickman  was  using  a  sledge  hammer  to  hit  the  13-5/8”  ring  gasket  to  knock-out  the  float.    The 
derrickman placed his hand on the handle next to the head of the hammer.  When he swung the hammer, he 
missed the ring that he was attempting to hit and his finger was caught between the handle of hammer and 
the ring. The impact caused swelling to his right index finger. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1)  Crew failed to conduct proper JSA to identify the hazard associated with the job. 
2) 
3) 
 

Improper tools being used for the job. 
Improper hand placement and poor handling of sledge hammer. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
1)  A meeting was held  with all personnel and explained the importance of the pre-job safety meeting and 

the benefit of conducting JSAs.  

2)  Personnel should use a pronged style puller, which is an off the shelf item, to remove float from tubular.  
3)  Supervisors demonstrated to the crew the proper way to handle and swing a sledge hammer. 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

Improper tools 

                      Proper Tools 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2010 

