 

 

 

 

 

• 
• 

• 

 

• 
• 

• 

• 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 20 

DROPPED OBJECT RESULTS IN NEAR MISS 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
A half-moon clamp insert weighing 1.9kg (4.9lbs) had been identified as redundant equipment and was being removed 
from  a  hose.    The  work  party,  who  removed  the  clamp,  was  not  aware  that  the  assembly  contained  inserts.    It  was 
assumed  that  the  inserts  were  integral  to  the  swaged  end  fitting  of  the  hose.    However,  the  inserts  were  held  on  by 
friction  and  had  “weathered”  in  place.    Two  days  later,  one  of  the  clamp  inserts  fell  12  meters  (39  feet)  from  the 
compensator fluid hose to the drill floor.  Even though this incident could have resulted in a fatality, no personnel were 
struck by the dropped object and the remaining half-moon insert was safely removed and brought to the drill floor. 

Lifting Collar Clamp Assembly 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

The clamp assembly had been in-situ since 2009 and had been used as a form of secondary retention. 
The  lifting  clamp  assembly  had  been  identified  during  specialist  DROPS  inspections  as  a  method  of  secondary 
retention.  It was not known that the lifting collar was not designed to carry out this function. 

•  Upon further investigation of the OEM documentation, it was discovered that the clamp assembly was only designed 

as a lifting collar to assist with hose installation and should not be used as a form of secondary retention. 
The OEM documentation was available on the MODU but had not been referenced and the clamp assembly was not 
identified as a potential hazard. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
•  All facilities were instructed to conduct an inspection of all derrick hoses to check for any similar arrangements.   
•  All facilities were instructed to contact their hose supplier and request that the lifting clamp assemblies are suitably 

identified and marked as being “for installation purposes only.” 

•  All rig personnel were reminded that OEM documentation states that the lifting clamp assembly may be left on hose 

after installation but that it is not for secondary retention. The rig personnel requested that this be amended by the 
company to reduce the risk of re-occurrence and potential dropped objects being left at height. 
The company contacted the DROPS inspection companies to inform them of this issue. 
The company amended their task risk assessments (TRA) to include specific detail on the removal of lifting clamp 
assemblies. 
The company amended their DROPS procedure to state that the removal of items from the derrick should be verified 
by a supervisor and to reference OEM/Technical guidance when required. 
The company updated their DROPS Inspection Manuals to reflect the fact that lifting clamp assemblies are now 
removed. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2013 

