Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 16  
 

TAG LINE RELEASES LIFEBOAT DURING LIFTING OPERATION 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
During a lifting operation to move a steel plate during high winds, one of the tag lines being used caught on 
the port lifeboat release wire, releasing the gravity brake and allowing the boat to be lowered to the sea.  The 
lifeboat did not disconnect from the falls and was winched back up to the davits without damage. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
  The hazard created by the high wind was not fully recognized, and the opportunity to call a time out was 
not  taken.    The  potential  to  snag  the  lifeboat  release  wire  had  not  been  recognized  during  the  risk 
assessment.  

  Although the tag lines in use were of the tangle free type, the textile covering on the upper body of the 
line had become loose and retracted causing a snagging point to occur.  This caught the release line and 
activated the lifeboat brake. 

  When the brake drum was opened for inspection, a large amount of oil residue was found on the brake 
lining.  The oil sump had been overfilled above the manufacturer’s recommendations allowing oil to seep 
through the seals into the brake area.  The oil on the brake linings reduced the ability and efficiency of 
the brake to reset when the counterweight was reapplied. 

 

event. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
  Crews  were  reminded  to  discuss  at  their  earliest  opportunity,  the  hazards  that  led  to  this  operational 

  All employees were reminded to consider the following: 

o  Take  into  account  all  conditions  during  the  risk  assessment.  (i.e.,  How  did  the  controls  to 

manage the steel plate introduce other hazards in this event?) 

o  Were the tag lines really inspected and fit for purpose?  
o  Was the condition of the lifeboat brake with oil contamination an incident waiting to happen? 

  Supervisors should ask themselves:  “What are your expectations of your people to properly risk assess 
the  conditions  of  the  environment  they  work  in  and  the  tools  they  use?”  and  “Is  maintenance  being 
monitored for quality according to the manufacturer’s procedures?” 

  All  crews  were  instructed  to  ensure  all  tag  lines  are  fit  for  purpose  and  sufficient  replacement  stock  is 

held onboard. 

  The crews were reminded to review lifeboat maintenance procedures to ensure that the gravity brake is 

tested by use of the wire release and not by lifting the counter weight. 

  Maintenance  personnel  were  instructed  to  check  that  the  lifeboat  oil  sump  levels  are  correct  and  that 

personnel understand the use of level plugs. 
 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2012 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Cable release wire that was fouled by the tag line, 
pressure applied and deactivated the gravity brake. 

 

 

The outer sleeve of this tag line created a snagging hazard. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2012 

