Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 25  
 

DEFECTIVE CLUTCH RESULTS IN DROPPED TOP DRIVE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While tripping out of the hole, a stand had been backed out by the Driller.  The Tourpusher then relieved him 
to  handover  to  his  relief.    With  the  Tourpusher  running  the  rig,  he  discovered  that  the  pipe  threads  had 
snagged.  He slacked back off the stand to rotate the pipe out again.  When he released the drum clutch, in 
order to slack off and rotate the stand, the clutch did not release thus causing the brake to loosely set.  When 
the  clutch  did  release,  the  added  weight  of  the  top  drive  on  the  brakes  caused  the  assembly  to  descend.  
The top drive contacted the top tool joint and bowed out the stand of pipe.  The Tourpusher applied the brake 
further, which stopped the top drive’s descent. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

  The  operation  was  stopped  during  the  process  of  breaking  off  the  stand,  rather  than  waiting  until  the 
Driller had the block at the floor for the start of the cycle; The rig operator did not notice that the clutch 
had not dumped its air when the clutch control was released to neutral; 

  The clutch control had debris in the control mechanism, thus preventing the air’s release and signaling to 

the dump valves to dump the air to the clutch; 

  The Driller noticed the brakes were not acting normal about two stands before the incident took place, 

but thought that the brakes had merely gotten water on them; 

  The  brake  flange  was  leaking  water  and  the  driller  thought  the  sluggishness  of  the  brakes  was  due  to 

water on the flanges. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed Drillers not to hand over control of the rig in the middle of breaking out a stand—set it back 
and bring the blocks to the floor in order to begin a new cycle in the procedure.  
Instructed Drillers to listen for changes; investigate smells; investigate the feel of controls or any changes 
in vibration.  
o  Things have a “normal” sound, appearance, smell and feel.  The Driller should have investigated the 

 

cause when the brake felt sluggish for the two prior stands.   

o  A change in the sound of the brake or the sound of the air in the clutch dumping a few seconds late 

are indicators that something is wrong.   
If the brakes become wet the sound changes as they are applied. 

o 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2011 

