Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

POOR COMMUNICATIONS RESULTS IN PIPE BEING 

PULLED IN TWO 

 
ALERT 06 – 27  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 

A drilling crew had finished bull heading 3-1/2 barrels of mud down the annulus of the well and the pressure 
was  bled  through  the  choke  and  was  reading  zero.    The  normal  procedure  would  have  been  to  close  the 
annular during bull heading operation, but this time the top rams were closed.  A tour change occurred and 
the driller, who just came on tour, opened the annular preventer and attempted to hoist the 2-7/8” drill pipe to 
pull out of the hole.  A tool joint came up against the closed top pipe rams and the pipe parted at the rig floor.  
There were no injuries and a fishing job was not necessary given that the severed tool joint was still above 
the rig floor. 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
There was an obvious lack of communication at the tour change.  Hand-over notes are designed as a barrier 
to  prevent  errors  in  operations.    The  company  hand-over  form  was  in  use  at  the  time  of  this  incident; 
however, the notes were either incomplete or ignored.  It’s essential to the safety of the whole operation for 
the hand-over notes to be used correctly. 

Another standard operating procedure (and also a barrier to prevent errors) is the use of a sign placed on the 
driller’s  weight  indicator  stating  which  BOP  is  closed.    The  sign  had  been  placed  on  the  clutch  handle 
instead.  This placement put the sign below the line of sight and made it difficult to read as a result of the 
angle of the sign.   

A third barrier designed to alert the driller as to which BOP is in use, are the indicator lights on the remote 
control console.  No indicator lights existed at the remote panel.     

Were  people  in  too  much  of  a  hurry  to  confirm  which  BOP  equipment  was  in  use?    Did  they  assume  that 
things were done as normal and that the possibility of change didn’t exist?   

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed the personnel in the 
following: 
 
•  Fabricate the necessary signs indicating which BOP equipment is closed and place them on the weight 

indicator for best results!  

 
•  BOP Ram indicator lights are to be added to decrease the likelihood of this kind of incident in the future. 
 
•  Regardless of what information is passed from one driller to the next in the hand-over notes, it is 
the on-tour driller’s responsibility to verify what the status is of all equipment/operations.  When 
a different driller takes control of the operation, he owns the operation.  Don’t rely on someone 
giving you all the right information; verify it for yourself.   

 
 
Good communication is essential to a safe operation.  When you take over responsibility, check and verify—
the operation and all that goes with it now belongs to you! 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued August 2006 

