Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 31 
 

LTI—DRILL LINE SPOOL PINCH POINT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While the rig crew was attempting to slip and cut the drilling line, the Assistant Driller stood on the flanges of 
the  side  of  the  drill  line  spool.    He  did  this  to  use  his  weight  to  turn  the  spool  too  spool  off  drilling  line  for 
slipping  drill  line.    Once  the  spool  started  turning  he  was  not  able  to  get  away  from  the  spool  and  the 
momentum of the drum kept it turning.  The turning drum trapped his foot between the spool and the spool 
stand frame, pinning his right foot.  X-ray revealed no broken bones.   

Outcome/Potential Outcome:   
 

Bruised and swollen foot/broken foot/toe amputation 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The energy source in this incident is the moving spool.   
•  The spool turning past the stationary stand frame created a “pinch point”, where the employee’s foot 

became trapped, severely bruising his foot.  

•  The Assistant Driller did not recognize the “pinch point” hazard. 
•  No JSA had been developed for the task.  
•  We have learned that we must not take for granted because it’s a routine task and personnel won’t get 

hurt.  In fact many injuries occur during routine tasks.  

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
• 
•  Rig supervisors and employees were instructed that proper planning is always the best way to eliminate 

JSA was developed for this operation and the pinch point hazard was addressed.   

employee exposure to hazards.   

•  Ways to address this energy source are to guard the spool or ensure personnel are standing a safe 

distance away from the spool while it is in motion.   

•  Rig personnel were instructed to review a mechanical means for turning the drilling line spool. 
•  The  STOP  Program  helps  us  identify  “positions  of  people”  that  can  result  in  an  exposure  to  a  hazard.  
Personnel trained in STOP take a STOP Observation Card and discuss the Positions of People section 
in  a  pre-job  safety  meeting  to  determine  what  hazards  exist.    Crewmembers  are  to  ask  questions 
developed from the prompts on the form itself, such as,  

o 
o 
o 

“What risks exist for people to strike against objects?”   
“What risks exist for being struck by objects?”   
“What risks exist to be caught in, on or between objects?”   “What risks exist for falling?” 

 
•  We should always look for safe ways to mechanically perform tasks instead of using muscle.  For 
example, some drilling line spools have electric spoolers to spool on and off line.  Some spools 
are located where the drawworks pulls the line off the spool during the slipping operation instead 
of having personnel manhandle the line.  Another mechanical assist is to have the loader/forklift 
pull out the necessary drilling line before slipping operations begin.   The rig floor winch with a 
snatch block works well in pulling the line off the spool, all taking place on the rig floor, without 
risk of strain or sprain, or exposure to the uncontrolled energy released with the of motion of the 
rotating drill line spool.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2007 

