Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 21   
 

FORKLIFT CUT ELECTRICAL LINE WITH OUTRIGGER 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Derrickman / forklift operator entered the forklift and observed that the driver’s side outrigger was up.  The 
operator failed to notice that the off side outrigger had been placed on the ground to serve as wheel chocks. 
He backed the forklift up, and then moved forward towards the mud storage area when he heard a pop.  The 
off side out rigger had struck and cut the 480 volt power supply cable to the rig camp transformer.  When the 
power supply cable was severed, the breaker was tripped.  The operator jumped from the forklift unharmed. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Employee had self imposed haste due to first day in position, and failed to perform a required walk around 
inspection prior to operating the forklift.  In the absence of proper wheel chocks the outrigger was used as a 
substitute.    The  individual  was  recently  trained  on  the  forklift,  but  failed  to  follow  procedures  taught  in  the 
course.  The “Wells” team management had made a decision not to follow the new spotter policy issued by 
the operator.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed personnel to do the 
following: 
 
A check list will be developed and posted on the forklift to remind operators to conduct safety checks prior to 
operating.  The practice using the outrigger as wheel chock will be stopped.  The individual will be retrained 
before allowed to operate any forklift.  The Operator’s well site management will re-evaluate the decision of 
not following Operator’s Spotter Policy.   
 
Key Message:  Personnel may be trained in their job scope, policies, and procedures; however, it does not 
necessarily mean that they will make the proper choices not to take short cuts.  
 

Cut Electric Cable 

Area that forklift traveled 

 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2006 

