Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT:  KELLY DISCONNECTS FROM HOOK 

 

ALERT 08 – 42 
 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During  drilling  of  the  surface  hole  (12  ¼“),  the 
driller  made  a  connection  and  started  to  wash  / 
ream down to bottom.  Due to tight hole conditions, 
the drill string stopped two feet before the bushings 
were able to be set into the rotary table.  The driller 
received  direct  instructions  from  the  company 
representative  to  operate  the  kelly  spinner  to  over 
come  the  tight  hole  and  the  drill  string  did  move 
down  for  ½  foot.    The  driller  was  re-instructed  by 
the  company  representative  to  move  the  string  up 
and down.  During the process of moving the string 
down,  the  drill  string  reached  a  bridge,  but  the 
driller  didn’t  notice  it.    This  resulted  in  the  string 
bouncing  and  the  swivel  hitting  the  hook,  causing 
the  latch  to  open  and  the  kelly  to  drop  to  the  rig 
floor  resulting  in  damages  to  Kelly,  rig  floor 
handrail, mast ladder and driller’s panel.  

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The rig was provided with a 220 ton swivel instead of 150 ton swivel.  Due to this, the bail diameter of 
this swivel is bigger than the hook space could accommodate.  The larger bail made it difficult to close 
the hook without using force. This mismatch was not assessed by the engineering team or the rig crew. 
Failure to follow Management of Change (MOC) procedures. 

•  The  air  hoist  was  attached  to  a  whip  check  that  was  used  to  close  the  lock  of  the  hook  latch.    This 
resulted  in  bending  the  locking  pin,  preventing  the  pin  from  fully  engaging.  (Deviation  from  standard 
procedure). 

•  The driller was not paying attention to the hook load (weight indicator), so hitting the bridge caused the 

kelly to bounce. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Swivel was replaced with one that fit the hook opening.  In addition the kelly was replaced.  
•  The latch lock was repaired and the hook pin was inspected.  
•  Rig  supervisors  were  instructed  that  any  change  in  equipment  shall  be  accompanied  with  a  risk 
assessment in order to identify hazards and consequences. Refer to the company’s. “Design Control and 
Development”, Procedures and instructions Manual. 

 
 

 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2009 

