Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 06 – 05 
 

DROPPED BUSHING RESULTS IN AMPUTATION OF TOES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Operation at the time of the incident was pulling out of the hole with BHA and the Injured Person (IP) had just 
arrived on the rig floor to assist in the operation. A stand consisting of 2 DC and a hydraulic jar accelerator 
were being pulled through the rotary table when he arrived.  The IP was standing with his left foot back on 
the non-skid mat and his right foot partially on the rotary.  He was watching the driller waiting for him to signal 
to  set  the  slips.    The  driller  slowed  the  pulling  speed  as  the  jars  came  into  the  rotary  table.    The  exposed 
mandrel of the accelerator came through the rotary but the lower squared shoulder of the outer body hung up 
on the underside of the inner bowl which were locked into position, thus lifting the master bushing approx. 6” 
–8”.  The sound of the accelerator contacting the bushings appeared to startle the IP who attempted to step 
backward  quickly.    He  lost  his  footing,  falling  on  the  rig  floor  and  thrusting  his  foot  forward  and  under  the 
bushings.  Simultaneously the bushing fell to it’s normal  position trapping the IP’s right foot.  The IP’s foot 
was  trapped  underneath  the  bushing,  damaging  his  steel  toe  safety  boot  and  amputating  two  of  his  right 
toes. The IP was treated on board and was subsequently Medevac onshore for further medical treatment. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
•  The  IP  was  not  fully  aware  of  the  operation  on  the  rig  floor  and  the  hazards  associated  with  the 

operation. 

•  The JSA did not adequately address this specific hazard. 
•  The supervisor and co-workers did not ensure that the IP was instructed about the work on going. 
•  The IP was looking in the wrong direction to see what was happening. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company issued the following directives to 
rig personnel: 
 
•  ALL SUPERVISORS to ensure that when new persons enter the work place, the JSA MUST be reviewed 

•  All Drillers to ensure that no one is to start to work on the rig floor without being briefed by the Driller. 
•  All JSA’s to note: 1) the possibility of square shoulder tools becoming caught causing the bushing to be 

lifted and 2) everyone to be well back of the rotary until such tools are brought through. 

with him. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2006 

