Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 15 – 08  
 

DISABLED AND NON-FUNCTIONAL SAFETY DEVICES LEADS TO DESTRUCTION 

OF DERRICK BOARD 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
Recently a directional driller was having trouble keeping a tool face and told the driller to work the pipe all the 
way  up  and  back  down  again.  The  stand  had  been  drilled  almost  all  the  way  down  and  the  elevators  had 
been  kicked  out  over  the  mousehole.  The  driller  picked  up  off  bottom  and  hit  the  link  tilt  joy  stick  with  his 
hand  in  an  attempt  to  float  the  elevators  in,  but  did  not  notice  that  the  elevators  did  not  float.  The  light 
attached to the top drive console that flashes when the link tilt is not in float was not working at this time. The 
driller worked the drill string up to the maximum height and then started slacking off. On the way down the 
elevators sat down on the diving board bending it down. The Tac II or Anti-collision system mounted in the 
top house that functions as an electronic crown-o-matic would have shut down the rig when the link tilt was 
extended above a certain height, but it had been manually turned off. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT:  
The driller did not make an attempt to latch the elevators around the drill pipe as per company policy when 
working pipe above the A-legs.  The anti-collision system had been manually turned off.  There was blatant 
disregard for alarms and defenses designed to prevent such an incident. 
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
  
1. Culture: The company will not tolerate this level of blatant disregard for the defenses we have installed. 
Drillers and Rig Managers will be held accountable if these defenses are not utilized. Drillers must report if 
any of these items are not working to the Rig Manager. Rig Managers should have intensified oversight each 
time they are on the rig floor ensuring that everything is properly working and our policies are being followed. 
  
2. Process: We are adding a new process defense on our Promptt system which will be under Tasking will 
consist  of  7  questions  that  the  Driller  will  answer  each  tour  about  our  vital  defenses.  After  he  answers  the 
questions the Driller will sign off on it and will be held accountable for any discrepancies. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright  2015 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

be applied to their own situations and practices 

Issued October 2015 

