Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 33 
 

INADVERTENT ACTIVATION OF CONTROL LEVER RESULTS IN SERIOUS INJURY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The operation in progress was making-up 9 ½ drill collar lifting sub in a drill collar which was setting in the 
rotary table slips.  A crewman was using a chain tong to tighten the lifting sub.  The Rig Manager was inside 
the driller’s cabin lowering the elevator to latch on to the lifting sub.  As he reached for the joystick on the 
control panel, the back of his right hand brushed the rotary table speed knob resulting in the knob turning.  
This caused the rotary table to spin in reverse with the chain tongs on the sub.  The chain tong handle struck 
the injured person in the left torso and threw him into the Driller’s side of the drawworks, resulting in a very 
serious injury. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  When the Rig Manager reached for the joystick on the control panel, the back of his right hand brushed 

•  Due to the lack of resistance on the rotary speed control knob, the knob easily turned, causing the rotary 

the rotary table speed control knob. 

table to rotate in reverse. 

•  The “Stop” position on the Rotary Table/Stop/Top Drive switch on the chair arm was actually a “Neutral” 

position and does not isolate the Rotary Table throttle control. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The  company  requested  that  the  manufacturer  the  driller’s  chair  and  control  console  reposition  the 
controls and install separation devices to prevent driller’s hand from accidentally activating any controls.  
This would need to be done on both the right and left sides of the chair. 

•  Exiting chairs are to add a plexiglass / lexan cover around the rotary control knob until such time as the 

control can be relocated.  

•  Rotary table must be isolated on the touch screen when using chain tongs to manually spin-in or spin-out 
tubular connections.  In addition, relocate the TD lockout button to the back of the control panel to allow 
room for the reconfiguration of the rotary speed control.  Add a RT lockout button beside the TD lockout 
button. 

•  Change RT/Stop/TD mode selector switch to a RT/TD selector switch. 
•  Drilling  crew  (including  the  Rig  Manager,  Toolpusher  and  Drillers)  must  undergo  simulator  training  for 

•  Create a new JSA to include locking-out rotary table when using chain tongs for making-up or breaking 

DDC (Digital Drilling Controller.  . 

connections. 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2008 

