Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 01 
 

SAND LINE FLAGGING OPERATION RESULTS IN FATALITY 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A completions rig crew was attempting to attach flags to the rig sand line.  After they had installed the third 
set of flags, the rig operator reached into the drum area to help one of the rig floor crewmen remove his pipe 
wrench  from  the  sand-line.    While  reaching  in,  his  stomach  area  came  in  contact  with  the  sand-line  drum 
clutch lever and engaged the drum resulting in the drum turning several revolutions.  One of the rig crewmen 
become entangled, resulting in his death.  
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Direct Causes:   
 
Inadequate guards or barriers:  There were no barriers to prevent personnel from entering or falling into 
the sand-line drum area. 
Making safety devices inoperative:  The person in control of the job did not isolate the sand line drum (air 
shut  off  valve),  which  would  have  prevented  it  from  being  engaged  while  workers  were  working  on  live 
equipment. 
Failure to identify hazard 
Personnel  on  location  did  not  recognize  the  dangers  associated  with  entering  the  drum  area  and  the 
possibility of failing to close the air shut-off. 
Improper position for task 
As a result of the factors set out above the two crewmen were in a very awkward and high risk position.  
 

Potential Basic/Underlying Causes 
 

Inadequate  instructions/procedures:    Personnel  should  not  have  been  instructed  to  enter  the  drum  area 
before it was verified that it was locked out and there were barriers installed to prevent workers from falling 
into the draw works. 
Lack of knowledge/situational awareness:  The person in control of the activity should have recognized this 
as a high risk task and implemented controls to eliminate/reduce the risk to an acceptable level. 
Inadequate  leadership  and/or  supervision:    Work  procedures  should  have  been  implemented  to  ensure 
that the work could have been done safely. 
Inadequate  work  standards:    The  procedures  for  conducting  this  work  were  insufficient  to  prevent  the 
accident. 
Inadequate  engineering:    A  method  for  preventing  entry  to  the  drum  area  should  have  been  in  place;  i.e. 
barriers to prevent personnel from entering the area, mechanical devices to prevent accidental engagement of 
the clutch lever. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Created a rig activity database and developed procedures/JSA for critical activities. 
  Developed and  began  implementing  rig  procedures/rules  and  ensure  there  is a  mechanism  for  measuring 

compliance. 
Instructed rig supervisors to ensure equipment isolation mechanisms are installed and used. 

 
  Developed service/completion rigs training matrix and ensure competency. 
 
  Began a process to improve the safety culture and promote the use of a ‘Stop Unsafe Work Process’.   

Installed barriers over the sand-line/draw works area to prevent entry. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2011 

 
 

 

 
 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

Location of shut down lever and clutch 
 
 

 

View of drawworks drum and sand-line drum 

 

Location of the fatally injured person at the time 
of incident (one foot on top of drum housing and 
the other foot on the sand-line drum). 

 

Location  of  the  second  individual  (one  foot  on 
the sand-line drum and one foot on a lower bar of 
the draw works housing 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2011 

