 

 

SAFETY ALERTS 

 

 

 

ALERT 1 – 17   

DROPPED CASING RESULTS IN EQUIPMENT DAMAGE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
The operation was running 13 3/8" casing. Equipment in use was an automated type Single Joint Elevator (SJE) 
with a mechanical latch mechanism operated by a Service Engineer. The casing joint was situated at the V-door 
resting on the bottom stopper. After the SJE was placed around the casing joint, the joint was picked up by the 
Driller. When the SJE was approximately 8 meters above the rig floor, the casing joint came out of the elevator and 
slid back down the V-door. The casing joint travelled down the catwalk, bounced over the end stopper and 
cantilever deck handrail and impacted the protection frame of the exhaust pipe lines near the accommodation 
bulkhead. The casing joint bounced back and came to rest on top of the casing joints stacked on the main deck. 

WHAT WERE CONTRIBUTING FACTORS: 

The pipe catchers of the SJE were not closed and latched before the casing joint was lifted by the Driller. The 
casing running tool (CRT) operator and the Driller took action without conformation that the pipe catchers of 
the SJE were closed and latched. The CRT operator was relieved without a proper handover in the middle of 
the handling process. The CRT operator had placed the SJE around Casing, set the slips of the flush mounted 
slip (FMS), but did not close and latch the pipe catchers of the SJE before leaving the CRT control console. The 
relief  operator  continued  the  task  with  the  assumption  that  the  pipe  catchers  were  closed  and  latched, 
signaling to the driller to pick up the casing joint. 

LESSONS LEARNED: 

1. 

Implement visual verification at all times by the Driller and designated person at the V-door that the pipe 
catchers of the SJE are closed and locked prior to lifting casing joint. 

 
2.  Designate  the  person  positioned  at  the  V-door  to  visually  verify  that  the  pipe  catchers  of  the  SJE  are 

closed and locked and give only established hand signals to Driller prior to lifting casing joint. 

 
3.  Agree upon and only use established hand signals from designated person(s). 
 
4. 
 
5. 

Investigate catwalk end stopper to prevent casing falling from cantilever to main deck. 

Implement thorough handovers to be conducted between crew members, for coffee break, lunch break, 
etc.,  where  minimum  operation  topics  such  as  equipment  status,  signals,  plan,  next  action,  etc.,  are 
discussed and at least one full operational cycle is observed until the end by the relief before taking over 
the position. 

 
6.  Review  and  update  JSA  and  Work  Instruction  for  running  13  3/8  casing  using  CRT  to  include 

recommended improvement actions for conducting safe operations. 

-A Safety Alert can consist of any type of health, safety & environment (HSE) notification or 

Near Miss/Near Hit alert.  Proactive Alerts on jobs well done are also encouraged. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2  

