Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 
ALERT 03 – 19 
 

LIFTING EYE FAILURE RESULTS IN DROPPED PUMP 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
While a centrifugal pump pedestal was being transferred with the crane from the starboard side main deck to 
the mechanic shop, the integral-lifting eye forged  into the pump housing failed.   The pump fell on top  of the 
gravel pack screens that were on the port pipe rack, ready to be run into the well bore.  The lift was well within 
the SWL for the sling / shackles.  Tag lines were being used to assist with controlling the load movement. All 
personnel were well away (20 feet) from where the pump fell and struck the tubulars.  There were no injuries 
to any personnel.  Five gravel pack screens were damaged. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Potential failure of the lifting eye was not identified. 
•  The housing of the centrifugal pump had a fresh coat of paint, which covered any possible crack indicators 

•  Presently in the Company’s lifting equipment inspection procedures, this type of integral lifting eye is not 

that may have been present. 

specified for Non-Destructive inspection. 

•  The normal operation and life of this type pump housing does not require frequent moving or replacement, 

• 

and it is not unusual for a well-maintained pump to be in service for extended years. 
JSA and the PTW were properly utilized, but in this case neither of these identified a potential for failure of 
the integral lifting point. 

•  Closer inspection of the lifting point prior to handling of the pump housing may have identified the failure 
visually,  but  without  MPI  or  dye  penetrant  inspection  this  would  probably  have  not  been  visible  to  the 
naked eye. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
Instructed Rig Personnel:   
 
•  Do not  use  individual eyebolts for lifting coupled equipment.  Eye bolts and the  threaded  holes for them 
are normally meant to lift that individual component only, not an assembled unit or coupled components.  
Lifting eyes that are built into or integral to cast iron housings are always susceptible to crack failure from 
impact.  The  cast  components  should  be  checked  by  dye  penetrant  prior  to  lifting  the  equipment.    Care 
should be taken with all lifts and avoidance of personnel and equipment considered when a lift is made. 

•  Revised all JSAs of specific jobs to identify possible integral lifting eyes for potential risk and failures. 
•  Review  safe  lifting  practices  when  handling  ancillary  equipment  that  is  not  normally  moved  on  a  routine 

basis to include close inspection of the lifting attachment point. 

•  Perform  onboard  dye  penetrant  inspection  of  all  equipment  that  has  dedicated  lift  points  prior  to 

commencing operations, which includes moving equipment with integral lifting points. 

•  Determine different slinging methods/lifting points if applicable and make sure that the sling and shackles 

are in excellent shape. 

•  All JSAs need to reflect this Alert.  This should apply to all lifts.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2003 

Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued May 2003 

