Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 27  
 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 

DROPPED OBJECT: HAMMER IS KICKED FROM WORK BASKET 

 

 

 

 

An  employee  was  operating  a  work  basket  inside  the  substructure  while  doing  various  tasks  in 
preparation  to  nipple  down  the  annular.  He  had  used  a  5  pound  (2.3kg)  shop  hammer  several 
minutes prior to the incident in order to break out the annular hydraulic lines. After he completed 
the  task,  he  dropped  the  hammer  to  the  bottom  of  the  man-basket.  While  he  was  moving 
throughout the basket to arrange the BOP handler (chain hoist), the 5 pound (2.3kg) hammer was 
accidentally “kicked” out of the basket. It was “launched” approximately 10 feet (3 meters) down to 
the Driller’s side of the substructure where it struck another employee on the hard hat. The impact 
of the hammer created a pinch point between the hard hat and his safety glasses thus resulting in 
a laceration below his left eyebrow. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

•  The hammer was not secured or tethered after use.   
•  Employees  were  standing  in  the  “line  of  fire”  watching  the  employee  in  the  work  basket 

•  The employee operating the work basket did not call a “stop task” to move other employees out 

•  Poor housekeeping procedures in the work basket (i.e., the hammer and other items were not 

complete his work. 

of the “danger area”. 

placed or secured properly). 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

•  Employees  were  reminded  of  the  importance  of  tethering  /  securing  any  tools  when  working 

overhead, even when working in a work basket.   

•  Personnel were instructed to discuss “line of fire” for any work, especially when the potential for 

a dropped or “launched” object exists. 

•  Personnel  were  instructed  to  discuss  application  of  Stop  Work  Authority  (obligation)  and  are 
reminded that SWA includes stopping and asking other personnel / by-standers to move from a 
“danger area.” 

•  The JSA / Work Plan for operating in a work basket must be reviewed / revised to include the 

importance of keeping the lift basket orderly (i.e., housekeeping must be maintained). 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

be applied to their own situations and practices 

Issued October 2014 

