Safety Alert 

From the International Association of Drilling Contractors

 

 
ALERT 03 – 16  
 

MISMATCHED HAMMER UNIONS STILL BEING FOUND 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Reports continue to come in involving pressurized lines and the unions used on these lines.  Employees have 
been observed mis-matching unions.  In addition, employees have been observed hammering on lines while 
still  under  pressure.    Several  accidents  within  the  industry,  including  a  fatality,  have  occurred  due  to 
pressurized lines being improperly connected or being hammered on while under pressure.  
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The thread (or male half) of a 2” 602 and 1002 hammer union will make-up to the wing nut (or female half) of a 
2” 1502 hammer union leading an oilfield worker to believe he has mated two compatible components that will 
withstand fluid pressures up to 6,000 psi.  As the threads on the two halves are of the same pitch and design, 
they will actually screw together.  However, because there is a 5/16” difference between the diameters of the 
thread  and  wing-nut  halves  described  above,  the  two  mismatched  components  will  NOT  actually  hold  high 
pressures  very  long.    The  hammer  unions  will  eventually  separate. When  the  union  halves  blow  apart  three 
immediate hazards are created: 
 

1.  The  wing-nut  becomes  an  8  lb.  Projectile  that  moves  in  an  undetermined  direction,  maybe  at 

personnel. 

2.  Uncontrolled release of high-pressure fluids that may or may not strike an employee in its path. 
3.  Uncontrolled release of potential toxic fluids (acids, oils, fuels, diesel base mud) that may cause harm 

to persons or the environment. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following:   
 

•  This company decided that where 2 inch hammer unions are needed on their drilling rigs, only Fig 1502 

hammer unions will be used.   

•  This company decided that workover rigs may use Fig 602 hammer unions.   

o  On workover rigs ensure that any service company connecting to our equipment (hammer unions) 

uses the correct size union.  

o  Supervisors are to visually inspect the service company’s connection(s) prior to work being performed. 
o  Supervisors were instructed that if 602 hammer unions are in use on their rig, they are to fill out an 
engineering request form stating that the rig has 602 hammer unions.  The completed form is to be 
sent to the company HSE department.  

• 

o  Minimize types of unions on location to only company specified types.   
o  Ensure all employees understand the difference between union types. 
Instructed all employees:   
o  Ensure all pressure is bled off lines prior to breaking lines. 
o  Use LockOut/TagOut and Work Permit Systems when working on pressurized lines. 

•  The company decided to work with industry leaders in an attempt to change thread designs for certain 

types of unions. 

 
IADC Note:  Refer to Safety Alerts 98 – 01, 99 – 13, and 00 – 15.  Also refer to the IADC HSE Meeting notes 
on Hammer Union Meeting. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not 

necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should  

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices. 

Copyright © 2003 International Association of Drilling Contractors.  All Rights Reserved 

Issued April 2003 

