Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 29 
 

IMPROPER USE OF DRILL PIPE SPINNER  

RESULTS IN AN MTO 

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A powered drill pipe spinner and chain tong were being used to make a connection of 5” DP in the mouse 
hole.  The drilling crew placed the drill pipe spinner on the lower joint of 5” drill pipe and a back up chain tong 
on  upper  joint  and  got  ready  to  make  up  the  connection.    When  an  employee  inadvertently  energized  the 
spinner, the other employee, who was holding the backup chain tong, lost his grip on the chain tong allowing 
it to swing toward the power spinner operator, hitting him on the left ear and temporal region.   
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

1.  Crew was using the power spinner and chain tong incorrectly. 
2.  Line Supervisor and the crew failed to recognize the hazard. 
3.  Failure to follow standard operating procedure. 
4.  Failure to conduct a proper JSA prior to the job. 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

1.  The  drilling  crew  developed  a  new  JSA  for  this  task  indicating  the  correct  working  practices.    This 
JSA states not to use the chain tong for this job.  Instead, use rig tongs to hold the lower joints when 
using the power spinner. 

2.  The  rig  crew  was  instructed  that  the  power  drill  pipe  spinner  should  always  be  used  on  the  upper 

joint. 

3.  Supervisors held meetings with all drill crews and discussed what went wrong in this accident.  They 

4. 

included an explanation of the safe work practices to do this job. 
Immediate Supervisors were reminded that they are responsible to oversee safe work conditions for 
employees. 

 

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2009 

