Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 06  
 

STRUCK BY INCIDENT RESULTS IN SPRAINED ANKLE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  haul  truck  driver  was  lowering  a  tank  to  the  ground  using  the  winch  on  his  truck.    He  pulled  his  truck 
forward to make room to back up and play out some slack in the line, which was connected to the skid of the 
tank.  While pulling forward, the winch line became tight pulling the tank forward just slightly.  The Swamper’s 
(truck driver’s assistant) foot was in front of the tank when it was pulled forward and his foot was struck by 
the skid of the tank.  The swamper was trying to remove the haul truck’s load line from the skid of the tank 
before the truck had finished its maneuver.  The swamper’s injuries proved to be “minor” (sprained ankle) but 
the loss severity potential was “major.” 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The swamper entered the work zone before the truck had completed its maneuver.   
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
  Reminded employees to never enter into a pinch point until all equipment has been immobilized and all 

 

employees involved are aware of their employee’s location. 
Instructed all personnel removing load lines that they MUST be certain that the attached truck is not in 
motion and that the truck’s airbrakes are set BEFORE entering that critical pinch point work zone.   

  Reminded truck drivers to stop immediately when they see someone enter a pinch point zone. 
 

Instructed employees to review best industry practices and company policy to ensure that this is to be 
utilized not only for haul trucks but for tandems as well 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued March 2012 

