Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 25 
 

SHIFTING LOAD DURING LIFTING OPERATION RESULTS IN MEDICAL TREATMENT CASE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A fly lift for crown sheaves was being prepared using a fly skid.  The Load Master requested that the crown sheaves be 
transferred  to  a  lifting  basket  due  to  a  shortage  of  chains  for  securing.    During  the  re-loading  of  the  sheaves  into  the 
basket, an employee climbed into the basket to re-position the sheaves for the lift. During the lift for re-positioning of the 
crown  sheaves,  one  of  the  sheaves  flipped  unexpectedly  and  uncontrollably,  trapping  the  employee’s  leg  and  causing 
severe lacerations and a puncture wound.  The injured person (IP) was treated on location but required a Med-Evac to the 
hospital for advanced medical treatment. 
 

 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

 

understood between the Supervisor and IP. 

risk assessment process. 

understand what was being done by whom and why. 

lifting the previous sheaves (see rear of photo). 

the task methods and safety. 

•  Supervision  of  the  IP  was  ineffective  as  the  task  did  not  need  to  be  done  at  that  time  but  this  was  not  clearly 

•  Planning for the task was inadequate and the hazards of the task were not identified nor controlled through a proper 

•  The  communication  between  the  personnel  involved  was  insufficient  and  poor  as  the  personnel  did  not  really 

•  Lifting  (rigging/slinging)  methods  used  were  insufficient  and  inappropriate  –  1  sling  was  used  as  opposed  to  2  for 

•  Personal commitment to safety of the job was compromised with no individual willing to “Stop the Job” and question 

•  The  IP  got  into  the  basket  during  the  lift  without  understanding  the  risk  he  was  putting  himself  under.  No  one  else 

identified the potential hazard of the IP being in the basket during the lift nor did they intervene to stop the job. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

•  Personnel  must  be  clear  on  their  task  roles  and  responsibilities,  with  the  Supervisors  taking  the  lead  role  in  the 
planning and proper assessment of job methods and hazards to ensure risk controls are appropriate for the task and 
correctly implemented. 

•  No individual should work or gain access inside baskets or other potentially confined spaces where they may become 

trapped and/or struck by objects during lifting operations. 

•  All lifting operations must adopt a (industry  accepted) ‘Hands Off’ Policy  with appropriate use of tag lines  and other 

positioning devices (i.e., Shepherds Hooks and push bars) to avoid the potential for entrapment injuries. 

•  The requirement for personal intervention when job safety may be compromised must be reiterated, understood and 

implemented when necessary by all personnel.  Everyone has the Power to Stop the Job if necessary. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident, and do not necessarily reflect 

the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

their own situations and practices 

Issued September 2014 

