Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 16 
 

EXTENSION CORD SAFETY 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During a routine inspection of a 110 volt coiled extension cord, an Electrician found that one of the leads was 
damaged.   
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Extension  cords  are  rated  for  the  current  they  can  carry  in  free  air.    If  you  use  an  extension  cord  to  full 
capacity when it is coiled up, the heat trapped in the center of the coil can cause the insulation to break down 
and melt.   
 
Heat is a natural product of current flowing through a conductor because there will always be some energy 
wasted  through  resistance.    The  amount  of  heat  produced  can  be  minimized  by  increasing  the  conductor 
size, but large conductor extension cords are hard to handle and are not very flexible.  As long as the cord is 
lying straight, the heat can be dissipated into the surrounding air.  But if the cord is coiled, the heat becomes 
trapped within the coil and overheating can occur, even if the current is within the load carrying capacity of 
the extension cord.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed operations personnel to:   
 
  Reminded all crew members that when using coiled extension cords, the cord MUST be fully extended. 
 

Instructed personnel that when they are using extension cords, they are to ensure that the cord is not 
caught under equipment that could restrict the flow of free air around the cord.   

  Personnel were instructed to take care to ensure that extension cords are not kinked or tied in tight 
knots.   
  Coiled extension cords are also widely used in many household applications, such as gardening, do-it-

yourself projects, home shops, etc.  Please take this information home and be safe. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
IADC Note:  Refer to IADC Alerts:  09 – 09 and 09 – 10; 
Also refer to the following links for additional information:  
http://www.gurnee.il.us/fire/fire_prevention/home_safety/ext_cords.html  
http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/16.html  
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2009 

