Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 24  
 

UNRECOGNIZED HAZARD RESULTS IN LACERATION TO LEG 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
A  derrickman  was  instructed  to  empty  the  brine  column  tank  on  the  rig.    Prior  to  commencing  the  job,  the 
derrickman  planned  the  job,  ensured  a  permit-to-work  was  in  place,  and  completed  a  job  safety  analysis.  
The equipment he was going to use included a 1 inch (2.5cm) water hose and a “jockey” pump.  When the 
brine tank was empty, the derrickman decided to flush the hose and the pump using the 1 inch (2.5cm) water 
hose.  He connected the hose to the outlet on the pump and pressurized it.  To avoid spilling the brine, he 
choked  the  hose  (Picture  #1).    The  distance  from  pump  outlet  to  the  pump  house  was  approximately  10 
meters  (33ft).   While  moving  against  the  pump,  the  pressure  built  up  inside  the  hose  resulting  in  the  hose 
slipping  out  of  his  hand.    The  hose  made  an  uncontrolled  swing  and  hit  the  derrickman  in  his  leg.    He 
continued to work until the end of his shift and it was not until after his shift that he realized the hose nozzle 
had cut his leg. 
 

 

 

Arrow indicates which part of the hose hit the injured 

person in the leg. 

 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 

Inadequate risk identification and planning 

• 
•  No use or lack of necessary aids/tools 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 

•  The OIM called for a job stand down with the rig crew to review the incident and corrective actions. 
•  The company directed all department leaders, on a daily basis, to pick a random job, call for a job 

stand down and use hazard recognition techniques to identify that all safety precautions are in place. 

•  The company instructed all rig managers to feature these incident safety stand downs at internal 

safety meetings. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2013 

