Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 07 – 30 
 

FATAL INCIDENT OCCURS WHILE DEMONSTRATING A  

FAULT IN CONTROL SYSTEM 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  Assistant  Driller  (AD)  onboard  a  jack  up  rig  was  fatally  injured  while  performing  a  function  test  of  the 
Casing  Stabbing  Board  (CSB)  from  within  the  unit.    The  demonstration  was  intended  to  illustrate  to  the 
Toolpusher, who was present, a hand controller (ascent/decent) fault related to an apparent ‘sticking valve’.  
When the ascent/decent control lever was activated the CSB ascended; the Assistant Driller moved the lever 
through its range of positions but was unable to reverse or stop the movement of the unit. 
 
The  AD  attempted  to  exit  the  unit  onto  the  fixed  derrick  walkway  by  grasping  the  entry  bar  and  swinging 
himself feet first beneath the bar towards the walkway. 
 
The AD failed to exit the unit fully when he collided with the Toolpusher who was standing on the walkway.  
As the CSB continued to ascend the AD’s upper body became trapped between a cross beam of the CSB 
running rails and the floor of the CSB.  This trapped position and subsequent force applied to the upper chest 
region resulted in death at the scene. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
• 

Inadequate  Management  of  Procurement.    This  allowed  the  purchasing  of  critical  equipment  from  non 
approved vendors. 

•  Failure to implement and manage the CSB installation project, while in the shipyard, through the use of a 
structured  and  systematic  Project  Management  System.    This  resulted  in  inadequate  training,  support 
material and commissioning. 
Inadequate Maintenance System and overall management of maintenance.  This resulted in a failure to 
capture the equipment on the PMS system. 

• 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Maintenance  system  structure  and  management  process  reviewed.  This  review 

included  an 
encompassing  analysis  of  appropriateness  of  current  system.    An  asset  register  and  compliance  with 
Management  of  Change  (MOC)  procedures  (including  training  needs  and  documentation)  were 
implemented. 

•  Undertook immediate analysis of current PMS system and cross-referenced with all inventoried onboard 

•  Undertook  review  and  roll  out  of  operating  procedures  to  ensure  all  are  complete  and  detailed 

equipment to ensure full inclusion. 

instructional documents. 

•  Established preventative maintenance schedules that test limit switches and control mechanisms. 
•  Removed and replaced the existing CSB control assembly with an approved type. 
•  Passed on learning to other users of identical equipment. 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued October 2007 

