Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 14 – 18  
 

IMPROPER CONFINED SPACE ENTRY RESULTS IN  

MULTIPLE FATALITIES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
Before  the  product  was  unloaded,  an  employee  entered  a  water  tank  that  contained  a  water  /  nitrogen 
mixture from the displacement of a rigless coil tubing operation and became incapacitated.  A co-worker, in 
an attempt to rescue the first employee, entered the same tank and, for the same reason, was followed by 
two other co-workers.  Realizing that four of his employees were inside the tank, the supervisor ordered the 
tank  drained.    He  then  asked  two  more  of  his  employees  to  enter  the  tank  to  rescue  the  four  personnel 
trapped inside by using a rope (safety line).  Three of the rescued personnel were unconscious and one was 
semi-conscious.  All four personnel were immediately evacuated to a local clinic.  After performing first aid, 
the semi-unconscious employee was evacuated to a nearby hospital for further treatment.  The three others 
were pronounced deceased by a local medical doctor. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Employees did not recognize the water tank as a confined space and therefore: 
•  Employees did not follow the confined space entry or rescue procedures. 
•  Employees did not conduct multi-gas testing (LEL, O2, CO2 & H2S) before entering the confined space. 
•  Employees did not wear the proper PPE for the task (appropriate masks for acceptable range limits, and 

breathing apparatus for over range limits). 

•  Poor and impulsive rescue attempts. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company reminded  all employees to identify and mark/label confined spaces and the risks in their 

working area. 

•  The company retrained all employees on confined space entry and rescue. 
•  The company reminded all employees to always follow procedures before performing their tasks.  This 
included ensuring a Confined  Space Work Permit has been prepared and the requirements have been 
fulfilled (Gas Test, Ventilation, Buddy System, Equipment & PPE, etc). 

•  The company reminded all employees to always implement the 3 Golden Safety Rules: 

o  Think first. 
o  Stop immediately 
o  Report immediately 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2014 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2014 

