 

 

 

 

 

 

 

• 

• 

 

• 

• 
• 

• 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 29  

WHAT HAPPENED: 

COMPLACENCY WITH A COMMON JOB TASK RESULTS IN INJURY TO THE DERRICKMAN 

The morning tour crew had just arrived to work on the last day of their hitch and would begin their shift by continuing trip out operations 
that were commenced by the daylight crew. 

The Driller was watching the Derrickman via a CCTV monitor.  After verifying that the rope around the stand was secure and that the 
elevators were unlatched, he floated the top drive link tilt cylinders back towards well center and began slacking off the top drive to get 
another stand of pipe.  The Driller then looked up towards the fingerboard to verify that the stand had cleared the top drive and, after 
noticing it had not cleared, he quickly released the brake control joystick to apply full air pressure to the draw works brake to stop the 
load.  The box (top) end of the stand had hung up somewhere on the top drive between the pipe handler stabbing guide and the link tilt 
actuator.  The downward travel of the load had stacked weight on top of the stand and had put a “bow” in the pipe. 

It was discovered that the Derrickman’s rope had become lodged between the spring-loaded latch handle and the body of the elevators, 
which was the reason why the stand had not cleared the top drive.  Rather than letting go of the rope and moving to a safe position, the 
Derrickman attempted to free the rope by “jerking” on it.  Instantaneously, the stand came free from its lodged position underneath the 
top drive and the stored energy in the “bow” of the pipe immediately shot the stand out towards the fingerboard and directly into the off-
driller’s side (ODS) alleyway, where it forcefully struck the Derrickman in the mid-section and drove him into the back handrails of the 
fingerboard.  Due to the extent of his injury, the injured employee was transported to a medical facility. 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
• 

The Driller failed to completely stop the traveling equipment after disengaging the clutch, which is common practice during tripping 
operations.    He  also  failed  to  visually  verify  that  the  stand  was  clear  from  the  elevators  and  top  drive  and  secured  by  the 
Derrickman before slacking off to come down and latch the next stand. 
The Derrickman had positioned his pullback rope too high (too close to the elevators), which allowed the rope to get caught in the 
elevator latch mechanism which prevented the Derrickman from being able to clear the stand from the elevators. 
The  Derrickman  attempted  to  free  the  pullback  rope  hung  up  in  the  elevators  rather  than  letting  it  go.    Additionally,  he  was 
positioned in the direct path of the stand of drill pipe as it freed itself from the logged position and was thus struck by it. 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
• 

The Driller was reminded that he should come to a complete stop once the pulled stand is properly positioned at the fingerboard 
level.  He should also visually verify and ensure that the stand is secured and the path of travel is clear of any other obstructions 
prior to lowering the traveling equipment.   
The  company  implemented  a  company-wide  policy  requiring  Drillers  to  follow  these  steps.    The  policy  will  be  communicated 
electronically via distribution of this report as well as a formal email to all Toolpushers.  Follow-up, on-site verbal communication of 
the newly-established policy will be provided by our Drilling Superintendents.   
“Stop” stickers will be made, distributed and posted at the Driller location on all company rigs to provide a visual reminder. 
The company suggested a recommended practice for Derrickmen is to keep their pullback rope below the waist.  This practice will 
be  emphasized  via  distribution  and  review  of  this  report  and  follow-up,  on-site  instruction  will  be  provided  by  rig  leadership  and 
Drilling Superintendents. 
If a stand cannot be secured and cleared by the Derrickman for any reason, he should immediately release the pullback rope and 
move  out  of  harm’s  way  by  positioning  both  feet  on  the  monkeyboard.    This  recommended  practice  will  be  emphasized  via 
distribution  and  review  of  this  report  and  follow-up,  on-site  instruction  will  be  provided  by  our  rig  leadership  and  Drilling 
Superintendents. 

“Reminder” stickers will be made, distributed and posted at the Fingerboard on all company rigs to provide a visual reminder. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued December 2013 

