Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 11  
 

NEAR MISS: CRANE CONTACTS HIGH POWER ELECTRICAL LINES 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
To  keep  from  causing  congestion  on  the  location,  the  crane  was  dropped  off  outside  the  location.    The 
operator had rigged the crane up as a short boom.  The crane operator, while being assisted by his rigger, 
then proceeded onto the location.  While moving onto the location the boom contacted the power lines and 
broke two 21’ (~6m) high power lines.  Fortunately there were no injuries; however, this could have been a 
very  serious  incident!    The  operator  and  rigger  had  apparently  been  distracted  by  other  issues  as  they 
navigated their path and had failed to look overhead and notice the lines. 
 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
1. 

Operator elected to rig up the crane outside of location and then move it onto the location; 

No pre-check of the route nor the hazards; 

No power line overhead warning signs were in place; 

Possible complacency; 

Employees possibly distracted by other equipment and only the route at ground level; 

Possible  routine  of  rigging  up  elsewhere  to  avoid  slowing  down  the  move  (may  be  necessary  on 
some moves); 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 
 

Reminded employees to clear the route and discuss any obstacles or potential hazards. 
Instructed  crane  personnel  to  discuss,  in  morning  meetings  or  other  safety  meetings,  the  need  to 
look  for  hazards  before  they  move,  maintain  good  communication  and  be  aware  of  their 
surroundings and hazards before tracking. 
Reminded crane personnel that before tracking cranes in or out of lease roads, the Crane Operator 
will  request  approval  from  the  Truck  Pusher  or  Safety  Manager  to  ensure  that  the  route  to  be 
traveled has been inspected for overhead power lines.  No exceptions! 
If there is no Truck Pusher of Safety Manager on location, the Crane Operator will call the office for 
approval.    This  will  ensure  that  the  route  has  been  inspected  for  overhead  power  lines.    No 
exceptions! 
The Crane Operator will have a spotter walking in front of the crane far enough ahead to ensure the 
route being traveled is clear when tracking cranes in or out of location and traveling on lease roads.  
No exceptions! 
Reminded  employees  that  overhead  power  line  signs  will  be  posted  on  any  power  lines  crossing 
lease  roads,  no  matter  how  high  the  power  lines  may  be.    It  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Truck 
Pusher,  Safety  Manager,  or  Crane  Operator  to  post  the  overhead  power  lines  signs,  whoever  is 
there first.  Each of these persons are to be issued overhead power line signs to have on hand. 
Reminded  all  employees  that  although  it  is  constantly  brought  up  in  tailgate  meetings,  we  cannot 
allow ourselves to become complacent in identifying hazards.    

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued April 2012 

