Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 12 – 05  
 

NEAR MISS – TRACK HOE CONTACTS 5 KV POWER CABLE 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
During the mechanical excavation of two 6” pipelines and a power cable, a 5 KV power cable tightened when 
contact  was  made  with  the  track  hoe  bucket.    The  power  cable  was  discovered  through  hydro  excavation 
and inspection of the survey drawings indicated that the power cable followed a path adjacent to the pipeline.  
The contact location was determined to be outside of two foot (2’) of the path of the pipeline underneath the 
backfill.  After being contacted with the bucket of the track hoe, the cable shorted when manually moved by 
the ground disturbance supervisor. 
 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 

Analysis (JSA). 

  The power cable was not identified as a significant hazard on the Critical Work Permit or Job Safety 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 

 

Identify Work Management Scope Changes:  Finding an unexpected power cable while excavating 
may  warrant  a  work  scope  change.    Once  found,  work  should  be  stopped  and  the  power  cable 
indicated  on  the  critical  work  permit  or  JSA  to  prompt  additional  mitigation  measures  (e.g.  De-
energize, hydro-excavation); 

  Standard for Excavating Power Cables:  Develop an explicit procedure for exposing an underground 

power cable to be included in the procedures for ground disturbance; 

  Never  approach  or  touch a  power cable  after  it  has  been  contacted.    Contact  an  electrician  to  de-

energize before inspecting damage. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued February 2012 

