 
ALERT 08 – 39 
 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

DROPPED OBJECT:  THERMAL TREE CAP (TEA COSY) 

FALLS RESULTING IN FATALITY  

 

WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The  operation  was  utilizing  a  rig  crane  to  move  a 
subsea  tree  from  the  storage  bay  to  the  transport 
trolley.  When the tree was approximately 20 inches 
(50.8 cm) above the trolley, a crane failure resulted 
in  a  non-powered  descent  of  the  tree  to  the  trolley.  
As  a  result, 
thermal  cap  was 
dislodged  from  its  pedestal  and  fell,  fatally  striking 
an employee involved in the task.  The thermal cap 
weighed approximately 980 pounds.  
 

the  unsecured 

Thermal Tree Cap

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
Further fact finding is currently progressing and not all the contributing factors have been identified.  Further 
communications may be required to highlight any additional contributing factors.  The key contributing factors 
in this event were:  
 
1.  The thermal cap was unsecured. 
2.  While suspended by the crane there was an uncontrolled descent of the subsea tree which resulted in 

3.  This uncontrolled descent of the subsea tree occurred due to an over-torque of the crane’s motor that 

the unsecured thermal cap being dislodged,  

operates the main block hoist.  

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
Instructed the Rig Manager and OIM to ensure immediate Corrective Actions to verify:  
 
•  Subsea Tree Handling and Running Operation Activities:  

o  Review, with respective operators and their suppliers, the operator’s and their supplier’s Dropped 

Object survey accompanying subsea trees planned to be handled or run on company installations.  

• 

If a Dropped Object survey has not been conducted, it must be completed and reviewed by all parties 
prior to handling or running any subsea tree.  

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
•  Ensure  all  items  identified  as  potential  dropped  objects  are  either  removed  from  the  subsea  tree 
(preferred  method)  or  secured  in  a  manner  approved  by  the  subsea  tree  supplier’s  engineering 
department to prevent and restrain any potential dropped object.  

•  The Rig Manager is responsible to review and approve the subsea tree supplier’s engineered solution 

prior to implementing the securing method.  

 
All cranes are inspected to ensure the following:  
 
•  The motor fitted to the main block hoist is consistent with the part number specified by the crane 

•  The motor fitted to the whip line is consistent with the part number specified by the crane manufacturer 

•  The motor fitted to the boom hoist is consistent with the part number specified by the crane manufacturer 

•  The findings from the above checks must be communicated to the Rig Manager and recorded in the 

installation’s planned maintenance system.  

 
If additional assistance is needed to complete the required actions contact your respective Business Unit or 
Division Field Support office.  
 
For all lifts (including client and subcontractor equipment) aboard company installations:  
•  Ensure all equipment is assessed for dropped object risk as part of the Job Risk Assessment plan.  
•  Ensure all items identified as potential dropped objects are either removed or secured in a manner 

manufacturer manual.  

manual.  

manual.  

approved by the Rig Manager.  

 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2008 

