Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 11 – 14 

HIGH POTENTIAL NEAR MISS - DROPPED OBJECT 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The drill crew was tripping in the hole with 5 ½ inch drill pipe. The derrickman attempted to place a stand of 
drill pipe in the elevators but missed and the stand was dropped across the derrick.  When the stand was 
being recovered it was pulled back to the fingers, it struck the fingers causing shaking and vibration to the 
derrick and monkey board.  The motion caused a 12 lb. (5.4kg) speaker mounted at the back of the monkey 
board to break loose at the junction box.  The derrickman was standing next to the speaker at the time the 
stand struck the fingers and was able to catch the speaker as it fell and it was brought down to the rig floor. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  When speaker was installed in the new derrick it was not secured with secondary retention.   
  The  unsecured  speaker  had  not  been  identified  by  third  party  derrick  inspection  as  well  as  rig  specific 

  The speaker wire housing / mounting post thread was cracked ¾ of the circumference but could not be 

seen due to its location which was flush with the junction box.   

  The vibrations and shaking of the derrick from the dropped stand retrieval caused the speaker to shear 

inspections.   

from the junction box. 

 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig personnel to do the 
following: 
 
 
  Develop derrick inspection / secondary retention training to cover proper use of secondary retention, 

Immediately perform a full derrick inspection to ensure placement of secondary retention. 

hands on / visual inspections, corrosion, hazard identification and temporary and permanent installations 
in the derrick. 

  Conduct a full derrick inspection once derrick inspection / secondary retention training has been 

  Amend the “Derrick Access Log” to advise that all temporary or permanent equipment aloft is required to 

completed. 

have secondary retention. 

Speaker Assembly 

 
Derrick Location of Speaker 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2011 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 

 

Clean area-no crack or sign of rust.  This is what 
broke and was all that was holding the speaker 

Speaker wire housing / mounting post.  This point was 

flush with the junction box where it broke loose. 

 

in place. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2011 

