Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 13 – 13  
 

UNSECURED BASKET PIN RESULTS IN DROPPED OBJECTS 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The traveling block struck the rod basket pin, knocking it out and causing it to fall to the rig floor.  One side of 
the rod basket fell approximately 1 ½ feet (46cm) to 2 feet (61cm) causing 4 stands of rods to fall out of the 
rod basket. 
 

Old Style Pin 

New Rod Board Hinge Pin 

 

 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  The day of the incident the winds were gusting to 39 mph (63kph).   
•  The rig operator was running the rig in 5th gear in high winds at the time of the incident.   
•  The  derrickman  latched  the  tubing  into  the  elevators  and  the  block  continued  to  travel  up.    The 
combination of the wind and the swinging from the pipe being placed in the elevators caused the block to 
strike the rod basket pin, which broke the cotter key and knocked out the pin. 

•  The pin used to secure the basket had a cotter key on both sides to secure if from coming unpinned. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  The company required all rig operators to slow down the traveling block speed when the wind exceeds 

25 mph (40kph). 

•  The company mandated that only the new style pin as shown in the photo above is acceptable. 
•  The company replaced all old pins with new pins and created a tracking spreadsheet to confirm that the 

mechanics had installed the new pins on their fleet of rigs.   

•  The  mechanic  is  also  to  send  a  picture  of  the  installation  of  the  new  pin  to  the  company’s  HSE 

Department verifying that the installation has been completed. 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2013 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued May 2013 

