Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 10 – 17 
 

WINDY CONDITIONS RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
After the injured person (IP) finished his work in a tank he was going to the accommodation via staircase on 
the outside of the accommodation unit.  On the last staircase and when approaching the top of the stairs, the 
IP  felt  his  hardhat  being  lifted  by  the  wind  (wind  speed  was  40  to  45  knots)  so  he  put  both  hands  on  his 
hardhat to stop it from blowing off.  The IP then lost his balance and slipped down the stairs backwards, his 
feet bouncing on each step going down.  He stopped at the bottom against life jacket box.  The IP sustained 
a broken left foot and a sprained right ankle. 
 

 

 

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
•  Since both hands of the injured person were on his hard hat, he didn’t try to hold the handrails.   
•  Lack of safety awareness and hazard identification from the IP.   
•  Employee competency and awareness were weak. 
•  There are no clear instructions about using chinstraps during abnormal weather conditions. 
•  Some of the off-the-job hazards are not identified or assessed. 
 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
•  Rig  managers  are  to  assure  employee  competency  and  provide  means  of  competency  verification  on 

• 

work sites. 
Instructions  were  given  for  abnormal  weather  conditions  including  the  use  of  chinstraps  (when  and 
where) and using handrails where provided. 

•  Rig  personnel  were  instructed  to  perform  a  risk  assessment  to  include  accommodation  (internal  and 

external stairways). 

•  Based on the results of the risk assessment, implement controls for significant hazards. 
 
 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued June 2010 

