Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 09 – 33 
 

PICKING UP DRILL COLLARS RESULTS IN LTI 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
While picking up 6 ½” drill collars two 3” X 12” X 36” planks were placed on the catwalk to facilitate removal 
of the crane slings.  When the rig floor hoist picked up the box end, the pin end of the drill collar was resting 
on a piece of wood (3” high) which made the drill collar ½” higher than the 2 ½ inch angle iron rail edge of the 
catwalk.  As the box end of the collar was being pulled up the beaver slide (pipe/tool slide) to the rig floor, the 
pin end of the drill collar rolled off the board and over the angle iron then off the cat walk.  The drill collar 
struck the roustabout from behind breaking his arm.  The injured roustabout had turned his back to the drill 
collar and was preparing to connect the crane slings onto another collar on the pipe rack.  (see the photo)   

WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
  The catwalk is designed for post stops to be installed on each end and in the center section.  Posts were 

installed on each end but none was installed in the center section.   

  The crew members failed to recognize the possibility that the pipe might roll off once the pin end of the 

  Crewmembers  also  failed  to  recognize  the  unsafe  position  of  the  injured  employee  while  the  pipe  was 

  The  deck  supervisor,  crane  operator,  and  other  crewmen  were  in  the  immediate  area  but  did  not 

drill collar was pulled past the first post.  

being pulled up the beaver slide.   

recognize the hazard. 

  The JSA was only in English and not in the native language of the roustabouts.   
 

 

CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company did the following: 
 
 

Instructed  rig  personnel  that  JSAs  are  to  include  hazards  of  turning  your  back  to  a  load  being  hoisted 
whether it is by a crane or a rig floor hoist.  
Instructed rig personnel to stay out from between the catwalk and drill collars while a drill collar is being 
pulled up the beaver slide.  
Instructed supervisory personnel to keep focused on the big picture and the hazards involved.  Do not 
become too “hands-on” or too preoccupied with the current task, but watch for hazards.   
Instructed supervisors to ensure personnel are clear of potential pinch points before a load is lifted. 
Instructed supervisors to ensure that when there are two main languages are spoken on the well site, the 
JSAs are to be created in both languages.   

 
 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright  2005 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued November 2009 

