AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/09 

Safety Flash

April 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fire in Vertical Lay System Moonpool 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a fire in the moonpool of a vertical lay system (VLS).  A vessel had 
been involved with the recovery of redundant/damaged 10” flexible flowlines to on-deck storage reels, and ‘wet storage’ (on 
the seabed) was being prepared for a previously recovered section of 10” flowline.  (This flowline section had been flushed of 
hydrocarbons in January 2008.) 

Following the recovery of the flowlines to deck, the vessel made several transits totalling approximately 12 kilometres over a 
19 hour period. Work was approved to remove some gouges on the VLS moonpool doors utilising a pneumatic grinder.  A 
highly  experienced,  and  competent,  boilermaker  proceeded  to  grind  out  the  gouges  on  the  moonpool  doors  with  the 
grinding sparks directed down and into the moonpool water. 

A  fire  started  on  the  water  within  the  moonpool  centraliser  and  then  grew  to  an  above  deck  height  of  more  than  two 
metres.  The person conducting the grinding was using body harness/fall arrest equipment as the moonpool doors had been 
opened slightly to give him better access.  When the fire started, he experienced difficulty in escaping from the area as the 
fall arrest unit prevented the pay-out of the cable.  Fortunately a nearby colleague freed him from the fall arrest cable and 
they both escaped from the fire area without injury. 

The  fire  alarm  was  raised  and  the  fire  was  extinguished  within  25  minutes  of  the  alarm  being  sounded  with  no  persons 
injured or harmed. 

The following were noted: 

  The moonpool area, including the area below the VLS doors, was visually checked prior to the grinding, but nevertheless 

nobody observed or identified the presence of flammable liquids within the moonpool; 

  At the earlier onshore hazard identification and risk assessment, the presence of ‘inhibited seawater’ containing very low 
hydrocarbon levels had been identified, however a fire risk or accumulation of flammable hydrocarbon products within 
the confines of the moonpool had not been considered as a potential hazard; 

  The  concentration  of  hydrocarbon  levels  found  within  the  10”  flowline  was  inconsistent  with  the  hydrocarbon  levels 
expected  (‘flushing  fluid’  consisting  of  hydrocarbon  <  30mg/ltr  (flushed  earlier  in 2008)).    It is possible  that  there may 
have  been  localised  concentration  of  oil  in  the  intervening  period  through  gravity  separation  of  fluids  of  different 
densities and/or reintegration of oil trapped in the interstices of the rough bore pipe carcass; 

  The application of the permit to work, risk assessment and associated process were not sufficiently robust or effective 

and several management system improvements have been identified/implemented; 

  Competency  of  the  onboard  personnel  resulted  in  the  fire  teams  responding  very  quickly  and  bringing  the  fire  under 

control in a timely manner. 

2  Personal Locator Beacons on Helicopters 

Further to recent helicopter accidents in the UK Offshore Sector, the UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has stopped the 
use of passengers’ personal locator beacons (PLBs) when on helicopter flights for the UK offshore oil and gas industry. 

An  explanatory  note  from  the  CAA  is  attached,  together  with  an  announcement  from  Oil  &  Gas  UK.    Further  enquiries 
should be as directed to bhallbauer@oilandgasuk.co.uk or to philip.wiggs@imca-int.com  

 

Press release: 
ISSUED BY OIL & GAS UK 
19 April 2009 
 
REINSTATEMENT OF SAFETY BEACONS A PRIORITY, CONFIRMS OIL & GAS UK 
 
Finding a technical solution that will allow personal safety beacons to be safely reinstated for all helicopter 
passengers flying offshore is a matter of priority, oil and gas industry body Oil & Gas UK confirmed today 
(19 April). 
 
This was one of the key helicopter safety issues discussed at the first meeting of the industry’s Helicopter Issues 
Task Group in Aberdeen on Friday (17 April).   
 
Bob Keiller, CEO of PSN and chairman of the task group, said: “Reinstating these beacons, known in the industry 
as Personal Locator Beacons or “PLBs”, is being dealt with by an industry workgroup which was set up by Oil & Gas 
UK soon after an offshore helicopter ditched in the North Sea in February.  At Friday’s meeting, the Helicopter 
Issues Task Group agreed that the momentum must be maintained on this work and even accelerated where 
possible so that we can get PLBs back in use as quickly as we can.” 
 
 Following the ditching of the helicopter in February, the preliminary investigation by the Air Accidents 
Investigation Branch (AAIB) revealed that when the PLBs worn by the passengers were automatically activated 
during the ditching, they interfered with the long range rescue beacons fitted to the helicopter and life rafts.  This 
interference resulted in these main aircraft beacons being shut down, which could have seriously hampered search 
and rescue operations if the incident had occurred at night or out of view of the offshore platform. 
 
As a result of the AAIB findings, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) instructed helicopter operators in the UK that all 
PLBs had to be switched off for the duration of offshore flights because of the risk of inadvertent activation and 
subsequent risks of interference with aircraft safety systems. 
 
The PLB workgroup, involving representatives from the manufacturers, helicopter operators, PLB users and the 
Health & Safety Executive, is meeting tomorrow (Monday, 20 April) to identify the various options for a possible 
technical solution.    
 
ENDS 
 
For further information, contact: 
Britta Hallbauer on Tel. 07891 769 113 or bhallbauer@oilandgasuk.co.uk 
 
 
Note to Editors 
 

1.  The Helicopter Issues Task Group was established by leaders of the UK offshore oil and gas industry 

immediately following the North Sea Flight 85N helicopter tragedy of 1 April.  It held its first meeting on 17 
April, 2009. 

2.  It set up to act on behalf of the industry as a communications focal point for sharing information, advice 

and learning across the industry and with other stakeholders on matters arising from this and previous 
helicopter accidents. 

3.  The group is chaired by Bob Keiller, CEO of PSN and currently involves representatives of the companies 

directly affected by the recent fatal accident as well as Grampian Police.  At the first meeting, It was 
agreed to invite all offshore helicopter operators, the trade unions and representatives from the oil and gas 
workforce to future meetings.  

4.  Oil & Gas UK is the leading representative organisation for the UK offshore oil and gas industry.  Its 

members are licensed by the Government to explore for and produce oil and gas in UK waters and those 
who form any part of the industry’s supply chain. 

Passenger Personal Locator Beacons (PLBs) 

 

Briefing for Offshore Passengers: 
 
As you may be aware a recent incident involving an offshore helicopter has 
highlighted some concerns about passenger PLBs. 
 
The UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has discovered that passenger PLB’s may 
interfere with the long range rescue beacons that are fitted to the helicopter and 
life rafts. This could impact the effectiveness of search and rescue operations. 
 
As a result, the CAA has instructed that all PLBs must be switched off for the 
entire duration of your flight. 
 
In order to have a common approach, the industry has agreed to stop the 
carriage of all PLB’s onboard oil and gas related helicopters until a technical 
solution to the problem can be found. 
 
PLB’s can still be used offshore onboard platforms but will be transported 
offshore either as freight or, if onboard helicopters, will be stored securely in the 
unarmed position. 
 
An Industry Workgroup is looking at medium and long term solutions to the 
issues, and will work to resolve this issue as quickly as possible. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 

