AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/07 

Safety Flash

October 2007 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Pinch Points on Winches – Hand Safety 

A  member  has  identified  a  potentially  serious  hazard  on  a  tugger  winch,  temporarily  installed  on  a  vessel  deck, wherein  a 
hand could be ‘drawn in’ between the winch drum cheek plate and the winch base. 

Figure 1 – Typical tugger winch 

 

 

Rotating ring of bolts 

Stationary winch base 

Figure 2 – Detail of gap between winch drum cheek plate 

 and the winch base 

 

The operator for such a winch would typically stand with his right hand on the control lever.  It is possible that an operator 
(or  colleague  standing  nearby)  could  put  his  left  hand  on  the  winch  base,  for  example  to  brace  against  vessel  movement.  
If the winch was pulling in at the same time a hand could be drawn into the gap between the bolts and the base. 

These winches or similar models are in widespread use and not all of them have adequate guards.  It is recommended that 
winches with unguarded pinch-point hazards are identified and appropriate actions taken as an immediate measure: 

♦  Hazard warning signs should be applied to the winches; 

♦  Personnel operating or working in the vicinity of the winches should be briefed about the potential hazard. 

An example of an appropriate guard that could be fitted to such a winch is shown below: 

Figure 3 – Example guard for tugger winch 

 

 

2  Uncontrolled Lifts of Hinged Deck Hatches 

A  member  has  reported  a  number  of  incidents  of  uncontrolled  lifts  of  a  hinged  deck  hatch  which  resulted  in  damage  to 
equipment onboard a vessel.  There was no injury to any personnel.  One incident happened during the lifting of a hinged 
hatch using webbing slings and a crane; the strops failed during the lift causing the hinged hatch to fall back to the deck.  The 
other incident resulted in failure of the hatch hinges. 

Because  of the  potential to cause  harm  and  because  of  the  recurrence  of  similar  kinds  of  incident,  a  full  investigation  was 
carried out. 

The investigation team noted the following: 

♦  Opening of this hatch has been considered a routine activity; 

♦ 

In both incidents, sufficient force was applied to the strops or the hatch hinges for them to fail; 

♦  Lifting operations where the load remained attached at one end to the vessel via a hinge or other device represents an 

additional hazard that needs to be taken into account in risk assessment and lift methodology. 

The investigation team recommended the following actions: 

♦  Systematic review of all hatches which are required to be opened on a routine or infrequent basis using mechanical lifting 

equipment, i.e. cranes or hoists; 

♦  Review or completion of a risk assessment for the operation of these hatches; 

♦  Ensuring controls are adequate to prevent failure of lifting equipment or hatches; 

♦  Where controls are identified as inadequate, minimising risk, e.g. with a safe system of work or additional equipment or 

other means of control. 

3  Lifting Rigging on ‘Frog’ Personnel Transfer Capsule 

A recent incident has been reported in which there was a failure of both the primary and back up slings of a ‘Frog’ personnel 
transfer capsule, which was under low load conditions (a single passenger).  The personnel capsule with its passenger was 
dropped on to the deck of the vessel.  The occupant received injuries to his back and neck resulting in a medical evacuation. 

The Frog sling set comprises a primary and a back-up sling, each constructed of non-rotating steel wire rope.  A high visibility 
sling cover, closed by a Velcro fastening, is fitted, to  

i) 

keep both legs of the sling set together; and 

ii)  assist both crane driver and deck crews in monitoring the position of the sling set during Frog operations. 

Subsequent investigations conducted by the operator indicated that the slings failed due to corrosion.  The manufacturer was 
unable  to  confirm  the  age  of  the  sling  set.    This  corrosion  may  have  been  accelerated  due  to  the  hot  and  humid  tropical 
operating environment in which the equipment was deployed, causing condensation to collect inside the high visibility cover. 

The incident further highlights the importance of adhering to a rigorous inspection and maintenance procedure, particularly 
regular inspections of sling sets by a competent person, and periodic replacement of sling sets.  

The manufacturer has noted the following: 

♦  The  lifting  sling  set’s  high  visibility  cover  is  closed  by  means  of  a  Velcro  seam,  to  allow  convenient  opening  for  sling 
inspection.  This cover should always be opened to allow a full visual inspection prior to use of the unit.  Plastic cable ties 
or other securing devices which prevent convenient opening of the cover should not be used; 

♦  Users  of  the  Frog  sling  sets  should  conduct  a  one-off  inspection  to  check  the  condition  of  the  slings  and  their 
maintenance and inspection records, in order to ensure that preventative measures are being carried out and any sling 
sets showing signs of significant deterioration are replaced; 

♦  Frog sling sets should now be replaced every 12 months (the previous recommended interval was up to 24 months); 

♦  The specifications of the standard sling set were changed earlier in 2007 to a more corrosion resistant material; 

♦  Users in tropical environments (or environments which may cause accelerated corrosion) should change their sling sets 

to the new specification at the earliest opportunity. 

4  Confined Space Fatality 

A member has reported an incident onboard a vessel in dry dock involving a number of fatalities caused by an explosion in a 
confined space.  The explosion occurred in a machinery space and caused a serious fire.  Though the incident is still under 
investigation, it is considered possible that a build-up of flammable gas had occurred, which was ignited by an as yet unknown 
source.  

The company involved has recommended the following actions: 

Ensure that confined or enclosed spaces are certified ‘gas free’ before work is commenced within them.  It is also vital that to 
highlight  the  need  to  ensure  that  appropriate  atmosphere  monitoring  within  confined  or  enclosed  spaces  is  undertaken 
throughout the period of work in a confined or enclosed space. 

The following precautions should also be taken: 

1.  All hoses carrying flammable gas should be isolated at the supply source shut-off valve and depressurised during short 

breaks in the work, especially during tea breaks, lunch breaks etc. 

2.  All hoses carrying flammable gas should be removed from spaces during longer breaks in the work, i.e. any duration in 

excess of one hour. 

These precautions should ensure that the potential for build-up of flammable gases is minimised or prevented from reaching 
hazardous levels. 

 

 

