AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/04 

November 2004 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety matters  and incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons learned  from  them.    The information  below has been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Uncontrolled Decompression of Diving Bell 

Keywords: Decompression 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  involving  the  uncontrolled  decompression  of  a  submersible  decompression  chamber 
(SDC) during diving operations.  The three man bell vented to surface from 175 fsw when the last man leaving accidentally 
kicked open a ¼-turn valve.  Thinking that a seal had been lost, he immediately continued through the man-way to the TUP 
and secured the door behind him.  The valve was located on the bottom inner door and was not accessible from the outside 
as  the  outer  bottom  door  was  in  the  closed  position.    The  bell  was  allowed  to  vent  to  surface  as  the  decompression 
occurred at a rapid enough rate such that it was deemed inadvisable to try and ‘catch’ the leak with the addition of more gas.  
There were no injuries or equipment damage reported. 

Elements contributing to the incident according to the first report are listed as: 

 

the valve having been the wrong type and size; 

  previous  man-way  sealing  problems  which  initiated  the  assumption  that  the  source  of  the  leak  was  in  the  man-way.  

This in turn prompted a hasty retreat through to the TUP. 

The immediate action was to remove the handle from the stem to avoid a recurrence.  Subsequently the oversized ¼-turn 
ball valve was replaced with a small bore needle valve to affect a permanent solution. 

Sealing  problems  due  to  misalignment  were  evident  at  the  initial  stages  of  the  mobilization  when  the  system  was  being 
function  tested  onboard  the  diving  support  vessel.    Several  modifications  to  the  skid  and  clamping  device  had  to  be  made 
prior to achieving a successful pressure leak test.  The system was a recent rebuild and the project was the first one for its 
current configuration. 

Had the valve been kicked open with three men inside prior to opening the door to the TUP, the consequences could have 
been dire.  The combination of the crowded circumstance, the possible loss of visibility from the condensation build up and 
the  focus  on  a  leak  anticipated  in  another  area  of  concern  (the  man-way)  would  have  made  a  controlled  response  very 
unlikely. 

The company has summarised the key issues as follows: 

  The valve originally installed was not suitable for purpose in terms of both size and type; 

  The  testing  and  commissioning  of  a  new  or  re-build  system  should  be  completed  prior  to  its  installation  on  a  project 

vessel; 

  System familiarisations  and  drills should note and highlight the most likely sources of potential leaks  – in this case the 

bottom door hatch (this is the rationale behind the double valve arrangement of a bell flood up valve); 

  Caution should always accompany movements within confined spaces. 

2  Fatality – Fall from Scaffold Opening/Breakdown in Co-ordination/Communication 

Keywords: Heights  

Attached  is  a  safety  circular  issued  by  the  Singapore  Ministry  of  Manpower,  which  has  been  passed  to  us  by  a  member.  
Although the notice is from last year, the company has re-issued it as a reminder to its personnel.  The incident involves a 
number of safety issues including working at height, communication, lighting and management of change. 

 

3  Lightning Strike 

Keywords: Near-Miss 

A member has reported an incident which occurred while a yard rigger was preparing to lift some pipes from ground level.  
A sudden lightning strike struck the shore crane’s jib and a flash of lightning found its way onto the shackle, missing the rigger 
by a few inches.  The rigger was holding the nylon web sling at the time.  He was not hurt. 

It was observed afterwards that there was a burn mark on the web sling.  It was believed that most of the lightning’s energy 
had  been  transferred  to  ground  through  ‘earth’,  but  apparently  some  of  this  energy  had  gone  through  the  crane  sling  and 
onto the shackle. 

Fortunately,  no  injury  was  sustained  and  there  was  no  fire.    However,  it  was  observed  afterwards  that  there  were  minor 
burn marks on the lifting belt the rigger had been using (see pictures below). 

Burn 
mark 
on  web 
sling 
 

                 

       Rigger             

The company involved has noted the following indicators of potential lightning in work areas: 

  dark clouds forming overhead and/or inclement weather conditions; 

 

 

thunder or ‘rumbling’ sound as the rain approaches from a distance; 

lightning flashes in the distance as rain approaches work areas. 

The company has noted the following precautions to be taken in the event of these specific potential lightning conditions: 

  avoid standing next to tall structures or working at height; 

  do not stay in open areas; 

  do not use mobile telephones in open areas; 

 

take shelter in covered areas or buildings; 

  do not use mobile or berth cranes due to the height of crane booms. 

Members should consider the potential risk such weather can pose and the ways in which the risks can be minimised. 

4  Head Injury 

Keywords: Helmet/Lifting 

A member reports that a diver, whilst working on deck, suffered a severe head injury while attempting to align two 8” flanges 
on  the  deck  of  a  DSV.    The  assembly  was  a  subsea  buoyancy  tank  which  was  being  connected  to  two  flexible  risers.  
The risers were coiled on a deployment reel and the tank was temporarily secured on a raised launch cradle on the opposite 
side  of  the  vessel.    In  an  effort  to  rotate  the  riser  flange  into  alignment  with  the  tank  flange,  three  drift  pins  were  placed 
through the 3, 6 and 9 o’clock bolt hole positions on the riser side and partially into the tank side flanges.  In order to assist 
rotation, a come-along and nylon strop were attached to the pin at the 3 o’clock position and tension was applied in what 
was thought to be a controlled manner while the pin at 6 o’clock was knocked into place.  The pin at 3 o’clock deformed, 
was  forced  from  its  position,  bounced  off  of  a  structural  member  and  the  man  who  was  working  on  the  bottom  pin  was 
struck.  The blunt end of the pin struck and tore a hole in the visor of his safety helmet before leaving a gash in his forehead.  
Diagnosis was a compound fracture of the skull and loss of integrity to the sinus cavity.  Four hours of reconstructive surgery 
and  ten  days  in  hospital  followed.    A  minimum  of  two  months’  recuperation  is  required  before  any  diving  medical  can  be 
applied for. 

Safety Flash 

 

This  blow  to  the  head  by  the  drift  pin  was  caused  by  the  violent  release  of  the  pin  from  its  position  under  tension.    The 
misalignment  of  the  flanges  was  not  foreseen,  so  a  specific  job  safety  analysis  (JSA)  for  the  task  had  not  been  undertaken. 
Although the team had taken time out to discuss and agree upon an approach to the alignment, the method chosen held an 
unidentified risk.  The behaviour of the pin under the tension of a side pull, applied in such a configuration (partial insertion 
into the tank flange  bolt holes and against a shifting surface), was unpredictable  and not under the full control of the men 
performing  the  task.    Despite  efforts  to  retain  the  pins  with  lanyards  and  hand  holds,  the  forces  developed  and  the 
destructive potential were not anticipated. 

The evidence of the torn safety hat,  in addition to the injury, points to  a significant force at impact.   Due to the fact that 
damage was sustained, a report and enquiry will be made to the manufacturer.  The consequences of the casualty not having 
worn his personal protective equipment (PPE) in this instance would, no doubt, have been even more severe. 

The root cause of the incident will also be reviewed by the company.  It advises that likely subjects at the moment are: 

  Was the use of a swivel flange considered at any time? 

  The  original  installation  schedule  stipulated  assembly  of  the  flanges  after  the  risers  had  been  deployed  from  the  reel.  
This  would  have  allowed  a  greater  degree  of  mobility  to  the  risers  as  compared  to  when  on  the  reel.    Was  a 
management of change procedure engaged at this juncture? 

  Over the course of the engineering phase of the project several people were replaced for one reason or another.  What 

effect did this have on the integrity of the procedures? 

  The vessel was due to sail within 24 hours of the incident.  Did this constraint place pressure on the crew to rush the 

task prior to heading to sea where hazards would have been magnified on a moving vessel? 

5  Loss of Position of DP DSV 

Keywords: Umbilical 

A member has reported that a DP  diving  support vessel  was in the midst of  a  diving  operation when it rapidly moved off 
location by some 107 metres from the work site.  Two divers were locked out at the time.  Diver 1 was working while diver 
2 was at the bell on the guide weight.  The effect of the force was such that diver 1 could not return to the bell on his own, 
nor could Diver 2 manage to haul him back via the umbilical.  Once recovered to the bell, the diver, overcome with carbon 
dioxide  toxicity  as  a  result  of  overbreathing  inside  the  helmet,  began  to  vomit  almost  immediately  upon  having  his  helmet 
removed.  He was settled down, put on BIBS and gradually recovered. 

The company’s investigation concluded that the ‘run off’ was attributed to the effects of a Soliton.  A full description of this 
phenomenon  can  be 
see  www.falkirk-wheel.com/ 
edinburgh/information/john_scott_russell.html).  However, by the simplest definition they are subsea waves of significant risk 
potential  for  diving  and  ROV  operations.    Detection  by  slight  surface  irregularities  with  either  the  naked  eye  or  radar  is 
possible.    They  tend  to  be  seasonal  and,  although  their  direction  of  travel  is  somewhat  predictable,  reliance  on  direction 
alone as a precaution is not advised. 

found  at  http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/hsu00nonlinear.html 

(also 

The company carried out a risk assessment and made recommendations for operating in waters of known Soliton activity as 
follows: 

  When feasible, schedule work for low season Soliton activity; 

  Seek local knowledge and experience with regards to expected activity levels; 

  The vessel heading should be into the direction of the most likely Soliton approach regardless of optimum heading for 

DP or other environmental considerations; 

  A dedicated competent person shall remain on radar watch at all times during critical work phases; 

  Radar shall be tuned to optimise potential to see approaching Soliton, setting the sensitivity/gain to reduce wave scatter; 

  Break away or quick release lines should be installed on all down-lines; 

  Facility to overboard the supply end of tool umbilicals with buoys attached should be provided; 

  Clear runs for overboard lines on deck should be established and maintained; 

  When feasible, two divers should be working together at all times; 

  The DP operator is to be alerted when the divers have entered a structure or confined area; 

  Optimise control at subsea structure positions; 

  Divers should be immediately alerted of all anomalies; 

  No diver ‘turn arounds’ if attached to fixed structures in known Soiliton areas. 

   

 
SAFETY CIRCULAR ON A FATAL ACCIDENT DUE TO 
 
BREAKDOWN IN COORDINATION AND 
 
 
COMMUNICATION    < OSD / SY CIR / 04 / 2003 > 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
By Shipyards Branch, Occupational Safety Department 
Ministry of Manpower 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
In Jun 2003, a painter fell 16 meters from an opening 
on a scaffold erected inside a tank onboard a ship and 
landed at the bottom of tank.  He was killed on the 
spot. 
 
 
 
 

Two hand-held lamps 
& a flood light were 
provided 

Opening in the scaffold  

• 

•  While he was inside the tank, the deceased fell 

through the opening on the scaffold work platform. 
The opening was due to the removal of scaffold 
planks during the dismantling process.  

•  Although the "NO ENTRY" and "DO NOT USE 

THE SCAFFOLD" signs were clearly displayed at 
the entrance to the tank, the deceased still 
proceeded to enter the tank to carry out the touch 
up work. 

Illumination (lighting conditions) inside the tank 
was poor.   

The deceased had 
gained access from this 
manhole  

The signage "DO NOT 
USE THE SCAFFOLD"  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
OBSERVATIONS AND FINDINGS 
 
•  The  deceased  was  in  the  tank  to  touch  up  the 
paintwork  for  a  sensor  mounting.    While  he  was 
walking  on  a  scaffold  platform  inside  the  tank,  he 
fell  through  an  opening  on  the  scaffold.  The 
distance of fall was about 16 meters. 

 
•  One  day  prior  to  the  accident,  the  ship  repair 
manager  was  informed  that  the  inspection  of  the 
paintwork  inside  the  tank  had  been  cleared  and 
accepted  by  the  vessel  owner  and  that  the 
scaffolds 
for 
dismantling.  Instruction  was  then  passed  to  the 
scaffold contractor to dismantle of the scaffolds on 
the next day (the day of the accident). 

tank  were 

inside 

ready 

the 

 
•  The painting foreman, however, was not aware of 
the  instruction  to  dismantle  the  scaffold.  On  the 
morning  of  the  day  of  accident,  the  painting 
foreman  instructed  his  chargehand  to  conduct  a 
final  check  on  the  tank.  The  deceased  was 
subsequently  assigned  to  touch  up  the  paintwork 
inside the tank.  

 

 
LESSONS LEARNT 

• 

Investigations revealed that the cause of accident 
was  attributed  to  a  lack  of  coordination  and 
communication between the relevant trades which 
resulted  in  the  concurrent  execution  of  scaffold 
dismantling  and  painting  works  inside  the  tank.  
Coordination  of  work  activities  established  at  the 
vessel  safety  co-ordinate  committee  meeting 
should  be  properly  communicated  to  all  affected 
parties, including their foremen and workers.            

•  Shipyards  are  reminded  to  instill  their  workers  on 
the  importance  to  observe  strictly  all  safety  signs 
such  as  “NO  ENTRY”  signs  into  confined  spaces 
and tanks.  

•  Adequate lighting should be provided while work is 

being carried out inside the tank.    

 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Safety Circular On Fatal Accident due to Breakdown in Coordination & Communication 

For copies of this Circular please check our website at http://www.mom.gov.sg 

