AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/04 

Safety Flash 

December 2004 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Copies of Crosby Shackles 

Keywords: Lifting 

A  member  has  advised  that  while  inspecting  shackles  in  West  Africa,  it  became  evident  several  copies  of  Crosby  shackles 
have been introduced to the marketplace.  These shackles are said to be not up to the quality standards of RRC-271D and it 
is recommended they be immediately removed from service. 

The points to look for in deciding whether you have a Crosby shackle or a copy are: 

  on the face: 

a) 

the Crosby name should be embossed as per the Crosby logo; 

 

b) 

the CE mark should appear; 

c)  markings of 45 degree angles; 

traceability of the shackle; 

  on  the  rear  of  the  shackles,  two  different  groupings  of  IDs  should  appear  (3  for  Belgium  manufactures)  providing  full 

 

the pin should also be stamped (d) on the head with a traceable ID number.  

IMCA has also heard from Crosby Europe that these shackles are circulating in both the African and the European markets.  
They also advise that WLL (t), body size (inch) should also appear on its shackles.  On some recent shackles there could also 
be a marking such as ‘6’ for the grade, which may appear on the shackle bow and pin. 

