AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/06 

September 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Parting of Slings Causing Fall of Heavy Object onto Seabed 

A diving support vessel was installing a 24 tonne metallic cover onto a subsea valve.  When this large object was deployed 
over the side of the vessel into the water, the four 15 tonne round slings used in the rigging arrangement parted and the 
object fell into the seabed.  There were no injuries or damage to equipment or seabed infrastructure as, in accordance with 
the company’s procedures, the lift was made over a seabed area free of any field infrastructure. 

 

Investigation revealed that the four round slings obtained from a local supplier had been modified incorrectly and without 
due authorisation from the original manufacturer. 

  Close examination of the slings revealed that the fibre had been cut and re-spliced using numerous knots, hidden under 

the protective fabric (this could not have be spotted without dismantling the sling) 

  Whereas 6 metre (working length) slings had been procured from the local supplier, the manufacturer advised that the 
serial number on the round slings actually corresponded to 12 metre (working length) round slings.  The manufacturer 
also advised that it did not fabricate 6 m (working length) round slings of 15 tonne SWL 

  There was no manufacturer certificate for the slings available from the supplier 

  The blue label showing SWL was stitched to the sling, when it normally should slide around it. 

 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

 

The company noted the following actions: 

  Rigging equipment shall in future only be procured from approved and recognised suppliers 

  Rigging materials are to be always subject to testing and inspection as required by the applicable international standards 

and company rules 

  Exceptions  to  the  above  should  be  subject  to  a  rigorous  and  thoroughly  documented  management  of  change  process 

covering all aspects of the rigging operation. 

2  Warning Regarding Imenco Minilatch – ROV Fell Onto Deck 

IMCA has received the attached safety alert regarding the Imenco Minilatch following an incident whereby an ROV fell from 
its launch and retrieval latch onto the deck of the support vessel. 

