AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/15 

Safety Flash 

 April 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fatal  Incident  during  Change-Out  of  Chain  Wheel  (Gypsy)  on  Anchor  Handling  Tug  Supply 

(AHTS) Vessel  

A member has reported an incident in which one crewman died and another received minor injuries when a gypsy wheel fell 
over whilst being moved, resulting in two crew members being trapped between it and a cargo rail bulwark.   The incident 
occurred when a vessel was mobilising for a project which required the use of an 84mm wide gypsy wheel.  At the time the 
starboard side forward winch was fitted with a 105mm unit.  This was removed and stored on the main deck.  Installation of 
the 84mm unit then started.  

The crew disconnected the gypsy wheel from the crane without checking its final landing position.  Therefore, they did not see 
that the rims of the gypsy wheel were on each side of the skid rail for the chain lifter.  Immediately after disconnecting from 
the crane, the crew started to roll the gypsy wheel.  This resulted in the starboard rim dropping into the gap in the rail causing 
the gypsy wheel to tip beyond balancing point.  It fell over and pinned two crew members against the bulkhead.  This resulted 
in one fatality and one first aid case. 

Figure:  Plan view drawing of the intended route for the installation of the gypsy  

 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

  The immediate causes were: 

  Gypsy wheel rolled into skid rail causing it to tip over 

 

Lack of risk management: 
- 
- 

Failure to identify hazards and risk 
Failure to comply with safe working practices; 

  Contributing factors: 

 

Inadequate design review for this particular mode of operation conducted by vessel 

  Gypsy wheel was not handled in the intended method as established when vessel was designed 

 

  Root Causes: 

 

Insufficient lifting or handling appliances for handling and changing the gyps wheel; 

 

Inadequate monitoring and verification of organisational performance 

  Weaknesses identified in the design review processes 

 

Lack of effective implementation of risk management. 

Figure: Showing the cause of the gypsy wheel tipping over (in this photo the term “cabelar” is used as well as “gypsy”) 

 

The lessons drawn were as follows: 

  Gypsy wheel should not be manually handled or rolled;  

  Monitoring and verification of worksite performance was found to be inadequate. 

The actions taken were as follows: 

  Company-wide instruction forbidding free-rolling of these heavy items; 

  Technical task force to evaluate a safe method for the installation of gypsy wheels in the short and long term and review 

change out methods across the fleet; 

  All vessels to review and re-risk assess current methods for handling gypsy wheels and submit risk assessment for approval.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: crush, fatality): 

IMCA SF 14/11 – Incident 3. Crewman injured when steel plates fell against him; 

IMCA SF 16/13 – Incident 2. Fatality – man overboard (the crewman in this example fell overboard as a result of the sudden 
and unplanned movement of heavy objects); 

 

IMCA SF 18/13 – Incident 1. Fatality during lifting operations. 

 

 

 

 Fresh scratches to paint on Cabelar Fresh scratches to paint on skid rail indicating location of where gypsy fell into skid rail Direction of roll Intended lay down location  
2  Lifting Equipment Failure: Objects Dropped into Moonpool  

A member has reported an incident in which a chain hoist failed causing a 700kg load to fall into the moonpool.  The incident 
occurred when crew were moving moonpool carriages and frames into position during mobilisation of multibeam echosounder 
equipment through the moonpool.  The moonpool carriage was successfully positioned.   As the crew lowered the second 
moonpool frame into position, the chain on the hoist crane suddenly parted and the frame and carriage fell into the moonpool 
damaging one of the stopper bars on the wall of the moonpool before being stopped by the other stopper bars. 

There were no injuries.  There was some damage to the stopper bars and brackets. 

 

Figure: Multibeam carriage before deployment to moonpool 

Figure: Frame before deployment to moonpool, attached to 

multibeam carriage underneath 

 

 

 

 

Figure: Damage to engine room wall (other side of moonpool) 

Figure: Damage to side of moonpool after stopper bar was 

following stopper bar broken 

broken 

 

Figure: Details of moonpool frames and stopper bars 

 

  Before starting the job, all personnel involved took part in a toolbox meeting and job safety analysis (JSA).  A permit to 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

work had been granted; 

  The first lift, using the crane in remote control mode, was successful; 

  The hoist crane had a safe working load (SWL) of 5 tons; 

  The immediate cause of the incident was found to be that during the lifting of the frame, it was obstructed by one of 

  The underlying cause was stress and subsequent failure of the chain of the hoisting crane; 

Lack of specific procedure regarding lifting a moonpool frame 

Lack of awareness from crew who handled lifting moonpool frames to ensure smooth process during lifting. 

the bracket stoppers; 

  The root causes were:  

 

 

 
 The following corrective actions were taken: 

  Update annual load test to include dye penetration test to check for unseen cracks on hoist chain; 

  Update procedures and JSA for moonpool activity; 

  Replace hoist and chain and repair stopper bar inside moonpool; 

  Defective chain sent to certified third party testing for examination of strains caused by overstressing.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: chain, failed): 

 

 

IMCA SF 12/11 – Incident 1. Offshore tank container rigging failure;  

IMCA SF 01/15 – Incident 2.  Near miss: safe use of chains in rigging. 

3  Winch Brake Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which an ROV winch brake failed, leading to the uncontrolled movement of an ROV as 
approximately 800m of umbilical ran off the winch drum in less than 90 seconds.  The incident occurred whilst the ROV was 
being lowered to 1843msw depth.  It was then raised to a final stopping point of 1813msw (30m off bottom), and the winch 
was shut down.  Within moments the winch started to slip and pay out small amounts of umbilical.  This quickly developed 
into an out of control run-away on the winch drum, resulting in all, approximately 800m of umbilical running off the winch 
drum in less than 90 seconds.  When the winch finally stopped there was 225m (approximately 3/4 of the last layer) of umbilical 
left on the winch. 

During those 90 seconds, the ROV control room (on the same deck as the winch) was evacuated, the bridge was notified by 
phone and clear communications, and the vessel was ordered to move away from any subsea assets with utmost haste.  The 
vessel moved 18m to the north. 

All electrical power to the ROV system was isolated.  Due to friction, or some other unknown element, the winch drive motor 
caught on fire.  The ROV crew extinguished the fire with portable extinguishers.  The area was barricaded, a fire watch posted 
and all non-essential personnel except for the fire watch and his runner were cleared from the area. 

There were no injuries.  

Figure: Showing winch motor after fire 

 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

  A  preliminary  on-site  investigation  of  the  failure  by  the  manufacturer  was  conducted  with  no  conclusive  root  causes 

identified.  The failed winch brake was shipped to the manufacturer for a detailed analysis to determine root cause(s); 

  Following extensive testing and analysis, the manufacturer identified the most likely root cause of the run-off was probably 

a blockage in the winch secondary brake release line;  

  Given the damage to the winch the incident investigation could not determine a definitive root cause but were able to 
establish through elimination a probable cause for the occurrence.  A series of actions to prevent occurrence had been 
established these were included in the manufacturer’s technical bulletin.   

 
The following actions were taken: 

  The manufacturer released a service bulletin to  all operators of winches with this type of brake  advising them of two 

checks to perform to prevent recurrence: 

  One check, the Brake Release Line Check, verifies that the release pressure was dropping in the specified time and 

should be performed every time the brake release line or hydraulic power unit (HPU) controls were serviced; 

  The  second  check,  the  Motor-to-Brake  Load  Transfer  Check,  verifies  that  the  load  has  fully  transferred  from  the 
hydraulic motor to the failsafe brake and should be performed before the HPU was purposely shut down while the 
winch is under load. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: winch, brake, failure): 

IMCA SF 08/01 – Incident 1. Failure of ROV lift umbilical winch brake; 

IMCA SF 18/09 – Incident 2. Fatal incident onboard a dive support vessel. 

The rest of the incidents in this safety flash are hand injuries reported to the Marine Safety Forum. 

4  Routine Task: Badly Cut Finger Changing Mop Head     

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which someone suffered a painful cut 
to the finger whilst engaged in a routine cleaning task.  He was in the process of changing a sponge mop head. Whilst attempting 
to fit a new mop head he saw that one of the retaining channels had glue in it which was preventing it from fitting the holder. 
He tried to clear out the glue with his pocket knife and in doing so he slipped and sustained a cut to the left index finger.  The 
cut was quite deep, partially severing the flexor tendon and damaging the associated nerve.  A surgery was required to repair 
the damage. 

The incident highlights failure to manage change properly.  The injured person deviated from the original intent to carry out 
routine cleaning duties, and instead attempted to fix a new problem with the mop head with the tools and facilities to hand, 
without recognizing the inherent risks of the new task. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-15.05.pdf. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: knife slipped): 

 

 

IMCA SF 06/10 – Incident 2. LTI – severed tendon;  

IMCA SF 05/13 Incident 4. Finger and hand injuries.   

5  Hand Injury during Stowing of Anchor Chains 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which someone  suffered a first aid 
injury to his hand.  The crew were re-stowing the anchor chain after calibration in dry dock.  They were trying to get the chain 
into the compression bar but it was slightly misaligned preventing the bar from closing.   They tried lowering and raising the 
anchor a few times but to no avail.  A crewman then successfully used a large pinch bar to turn the link slightly as the chain 
was raised the last short distance to allow the chain to fit snugly in the compression bar.  Unfortunately he failed to notice the 
pinch bar was now aligned with the handrail on the adjacent bulkhead and as he lowered it his hand was caught between the 
pinch bar and handrail. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-15.06.pdf. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: crushed, finger): 

IMCA SF 03/05 – Incident 1. Finger injury during loading operations;   

IMCA SF 02/06 – Incident 4. Hand injury sustained by diver. 

Hand and finger crush/amputation injuries of this sort tend to occur where the immediate cause is not properly taking into 
account the risk of sudden and unplanned movement of very heavy or massive objects. 

Please see also the following similar incidents: 

IMCA SF 02/08 – Incident 2. Serious hand injury;   

IMCA SF 01/12 – Incident 2. Lost time incident (LTI) – laceration to finger; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

IMCA SF 05/12 – Incident 3. LTI: crewman’s finger pinched when moving the gangway; 

IMCA SF 12/14 – Incident 7. LTI trapped finger. 

Members should be aware that IMCA has  a  pocket safety card on this topic,  Watch  your hands – you’ve only  got  one set! 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/102527/imcaspc08.pdf. 

   

 

6  Finger Injury – Pinchpoint – during Hose Handling   

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which someone injured his finger 
during hose handling.  The incident occurred when a vessel was performing operations at the leeside of the platform.  The fuel 
hose was lowered by a bridle which was connected to the saddle fitted on the hose.  The hose coupling was hanging loose.  An 
Able Bodied Seaman (AB) handled the hose coupling and moved it away.  The other AB positioned the saddle on the ship’s 
side, between two yellow pins, and started to secure the saddle to one of the pins using a rope.  When the vessel moved due 
to the wind and swell, the saddle moved on the railing between the pins and the AB’s finger was pinched between the saddle 
and the pin. 

The  safety  flash  can  be  downloaded  from  http://www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-
15.11.pdf.  

