AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/08 

Safety Flash

April 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fall Through Open Hatch in Walkway 

A  member  has  reported  a  incident  onboard  an  offshore  construction  vessel  in  which  a  crew  member  fell  through  an 
unprotected hatch on a walkway on to the deck below.  The injuries sustained were only slight bruising and abrasions to left 
arm, upper chest and left knee.  Whilst the injuries were light, the potential for serious injury was high. 

The hatch, which had been installed along with an access ladder when an additional air conditioning (AC) unit was placed on 
top of the bridge, had been left tied open by another worker.  The crew member fell through the hatch after raising a safety 
barrier on the walkway whilst going to inspect some heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) air ducts. 

Following investigation, the following points were noted: 

♦  The addition of the hatch in the walkway should have been risk assessed and a management of change (MoC) process 

♦  Following  this  incident  the  ladder  access  to  HVAC  air  ducts  was  relocated  to  an  area  outside  the  walkway,  thus 

eliminating the need for a hatch.  The hatch was welded shut. 

♦  Personnel were reminded never to leave a hatchway open without it being barricaded on all sid

es. 

♦  Personnel were reminded never to raise a safety barrier in haste or to enter a danger zone without evaluating potential 

followed. 

dangers. 

 

 

Before 

After 

 

 

2  Near-Miss Involving Knuckle Boom Crane – Hydraulic Pump Selection 

A member has reported a near-miss incident where a 220 litre drum and pallet lifter made an uncontrolled descent to within 
2 metres of the deck.  The drum was being moved on to the main deck from the quayside using the whipline of a knuckle 
boom, heave compensated, computer assisted type crane. 

It is possible, on the type of crane used, for the crane operator to select the number of hydraulic pumps required dependent 
on the operations to be completed.  There were four hydraulic pumps available but as the operation appeared to require 
only a single function at low speed the operator had selected only two pumps. 

The crane operator was manoeuvring the load to the selected position using the left slew, boom up, knuckle in and whipline 
lowering functions. 

On reaching the approximate landing area, the deck foreman and rigger were preparing to take control of the load with the 
taglines  when  the  load  commenced  an  uncontrolled  descent  of  approximately  three  metres  and  then  came  to  a  stop 
approximately two metres from the deck.  When the deck foreman and rigger heard the load descending they moved clear. 

The crane manufacturer was contacted.  One of its technicians inspected the crane and reviewed the circumstances leading 
to the incident.  His findings were as follows: 

“The reported incident appears to be a combination of improper use of pumps during operation – the operator had only two 
out of the four main pumps running when using multiple functions.  This resulted in reduced flow to all functions when all 
functions were activated.  When the majority of functions were deactivated and the winch function was still fully active, all 
hydraulic flow was diverted to the fully open winch function, causing an unintended situation.” 

The crane manufacturer has confirmed that there is a danger that if only two pumps are running the system will produce this 
“unintended situation”. 

The member involved has instigated the following corrective/preventative actions: 

To ensure safe working for lifting operations involving this type of crane, supervisory staff, in consultation with workers and 
their representatives are to provide all crane operators with the information contained in this safety notice, and: 

♦  during crane driver training/familiarisation, reiterate the requirement to have, as a minimum, three pumps working and 
warning of the danger of not doing so.  It is appreciated that some operations can be completed with only two pumps; 
two pumps should only be selected for a lifting operation when careful assessment has been made of the likely risks and 
it  is  ensured  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  a  dropped  load.    An  additional  risk  assessment  must  be  completed  to 
document two-pump operations and the precautions in place that ensure safe operations; 

♦ 

install a warning notice in the crane cab highlighting the requirement to have, as a minimum, three pumps running; 

♦  review the risk assessment for the crane, with additional focus on the potential for this type of incide

nt; 

♦  ensure supervisory personnel involved in lifting operations take responsibility for disseminating this notice and raise deck 
crew  awareness  of  potential  dropped  loads  through  review  of  the  revised  risk  assessment  and  the  completion  of  a 
toolbox talk prior to lifting operations; 

♦  provide all personnel onboard with information and instruction regarding the incident and the dangers of approaching 

any raised/suspended loa

ds; 

♦ 

issue this notice to IMCA and request distribution throughout the industry to warn others of the potential for incorrect 
set-up and operation of this type of crane syste

m. 

 

3  Partial Parting of a Bell Main Lift Wire 

A member has reported the partial parting of a bell main lift wire. 

During bell recovery a member of the dive team noticed damage on the bell main lift wire, 48m from the bell. 

The bell recovery was stopped, the bell guide weights were brought up to support the bell, strands of damaged wire were 
removed by the diving technicians and deck crew and the bell was lifted using the bell guide wire.  The bell was then locked 
into the cursor and safely clamped on to the system. 

Photograph showing partly parted wire 

 

After investigation by the company involved, the following points were highlighted: 

♦  The  cause  of  the  wire  rope  failure  was  internal  corrosion  damage  where  the  inner  core  wires  of  the  rope  had  been 

reduced in size by up to 50% with no external damage visible; 

♦  The rope lubricant had been lost internally and the galvanised coating was no longer present.  Both of these two factors 

had accelerated the corrosion of the wir

es; 

♦  The local corrosion of the core wires had led to a loss in diameter and strength.  The loss in strength had resulted in 

overload of the individual wires and placed additional stress on the core. 

When checking the size of the bell wire (nominally 22mm diameter) approximately 3m each side of the damaged area, the 
diameter was recorded as 21mm.  At various other areas of the wire the readings were between 21.3mm and 21.8mm. 

ISO 4309 2004 paragraph 3.5.7 allows for a 3% reduction for multi strand wire making 21mm outside acceptable tolerances. 

Even though the wire inspection, testing and maintenance procedures used by the company were in accordance with local 
legislation, IMCA guidance and company procedures, the deterioration of the wire failed to be detected. 

The company noted that inspections had been carried out for the wire at six monthly intervals, annual destructive tests had 
been carried out, a comment regarding lack of lubrication had been noted in last report of destructive testing and pressure 
lubrication of the wire had been carried out at six-month intervals. 

 

Photograph of a section taken from the core of the rope close to the fracture 

 

Possible contributory factors to the failure of the bell wire identified by the member company were:  

♦  The extent of the detrimental effect of multiple sheaves and sheave diameters in use; 

♦  The wire rope had, over a number of years, been bent over heave compensator sheaves which could have led to internal 

fretting taking place within the rope once the rope lubricant had been lost; 

♦  High  peak  loads  could  have  been  experienced  on  the  system  when  the  heave  compensators  were  fully  compressed 

before the bell and cursor were handled in moon

-pool; 

♦  The bell wire was eight years old which was inside the company’s discard policy of ten years which may need to be re-

assessed. 

Members are urged to consider all of the points raised and review their own wire rope maintenance and testing policies as 
appropriate. 

