AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/05 

December 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of High Pressure Fitting 

A member has reported an incident wherein a half inch HP fitting failed at 200 bar.  Whilst no damage was sustained other 
than to the fitting and the whip check and no injury was sustained, the incident is believed to have had the potential for more 
serious consequences and was investigated as a high potential event. 

A  dive  vessel  had  been  heading  for  port  after  completing  a  phase  of  work.    Both  diving  bells  had  been  surfaced  to  allow 
access for maintenance work.  The gas from the bells had been reclaimed into storage in the gas hold of the vessel.  The dirty 
reclaim tubes were full after this exercise, so it was decided to clean this gas for use later as a dive mix. 

The on-shift life support supervisor (LSS) entered the gas hold to set up the gas supplies for cleaning, which included putting 
the dirty gas tubes on-line to the cleaner at a supply pressure of 200 bar gauge.  Having opened the supply to the cleaner, he 
was walking towards it when he heard a loud bang and a continuous rush of gas.  On turning round, he could see that the 
supply hose from the dirty gas had blown off and gas was venting into the gas hold from the tubes.  He closed off the dirty 
reclaim tubes and isolated the escaping gas. 

On examination, it was noted that the Comex spin fitting that connected the gas whip to the supply manifold had blown off.  
The  whip  was  undamaged.    There  was  clear  evidence  of  the  track  the  female  connection  had  made  across  the  male 
connection as it parted.  On examination of the fitting to ascertain the cause of the failure, it was noted that the gas whip 
fitting had blown off the supply connection. 

Since there was no clear way of establishing if the other spin-fit fittings could be subjected to the same failure and since new 
fittings  of  the same  type  were  not immediately  available,  the  only  safe course  of  action  was  to  temporarily  replace  all  the 
Comex spin-fit connections on the gas supply lines with JIC fittings.  During the shift handover meetings immediately after the 
incident, all personnel were reminded to check that HP fittings and whip check cords were in good condition and correctly 
aligned. 

It was concluded that the failure was likely caused by worn threads and daily use exerted on a 20-year old fitting that had 
been subjected to stretch as a normal part of daily use.  It is believed the whip check cord failed due to the kinetic energy 
generated as the fitting blew, coupled with the fact that the whip check was not fully extended against the whip and had some 
slack in it.  Corrosion may also have been a contributory cause of the failure. 

The root causes were identified as being that: 

 

 

there had been no planned maintenance/inspection routine for checking wear on the Comex spin-fit fittings; 

there had been uncertainty regarding how best to position whip check cords on the gas manifolds and how they should 
be rated to ensure they could cope with the energy that may be exerted upon them. 

The following conclusions were drawn by the company involved: 

  Wear  on  the  male/female  thread  of  the  Comex  spin-fitting  had  been  allowed  to  occur  over  a  protracted  period 

unchecked by any formal planned maintenance or inspection routines; 

  Suitable replacement spin-fit fittings have been sourced and fitted on the gas manifolds in the gas hold and in saturation 
control.  Planned maintenance instructions covering the inspection of the HP whips were revised to include inspection 
and testing of spin-fit connectors; 

 

It proposes that high pressure fittings which are subject to wear be changed out every five years; 

Increased awareness is required on how to fit whip checks correctly and more information is required on what size whip 
check to use on what application, i.e. diameter of hose and pressure within the hose both affect the amount of stored 
energy that could be released. 

 

 

2  Lifting Fatality 

A  member  has  reported  a  fatality  during  crane  operations.    The  accident  occurred  alongside  in  port  during  the  hours  of 
darkness.    A  vessel  was  engaged  in  lifting  operations  involving  the  use  of  a  mobile  crane  (positioned  on  the  quayside)  to 
remove  a  deck  mounted  generator  and  to  load  a  replacement.    The  experienced  lifting  crew  had  been  trained  in  crane 
operations and had worked together before. 

The  generator  was  located  on  the  port  side  of  the  aft  deck  of  the  vessel.    Nevertheless,  because  of  the  presence  of 
potentially fragile bulwark-mounted survey equipment on the port side of the vessel, she came alongside starboard side-to.  
This meant that the crane operator had to extend the crane boom to 18m to complete the lift. 

The deck mounted generator was successfully lifted off the vessel and placed on the quay.  The replacement generator was 
then  connected  to  the  crane  and  the  second  lift  commenced.    The  two  generator  housings,  whilst  slightly  different  in 
dimensions, were considerably different in weight, but this was not detected.  The first generator weighed 3.6T, whereas the 
replacement unit weighed 4.9T.  The safe working load of the crane at 18m boom extension was between 2.35T and 2.85T.  
Both lifts exceeded the safe working load of the crane. 

Whilst attempting to position the replacement generator, the crane was required to ‘jib-out’.  As a result of the combined 
boom extension and excessive load, the mobile crane’s outriggers lifted off the quayside.  This compromised the stability of 
the  crane,  causing  the  load  to  move  unexpectedly  downwards  and  across  the  deck  simultaneously  at  considerable  speed.  
The two tagline operators were unable to control this sudden movement.  One crane worker was unable to get clear in time 
and  was  struck  by  the  load,  suffering  severe  crush  injuries  to  his  right  leg  and  torso.    He  was  transferred  immediately  to 
hospital but was pronounced dead on arrival. 

The company conducted an investigation into the accident, which reported the following causes: 

  Failure to adhere to specific areas of the safety management system, in particular: 

  The mobile crane had been working with a load over and above its safe working limits. 

vessel mobilisation procedure 

– 
–  management of change procedure 
– 
– 

risk assessment 
supply chain management 

  Company safety rules had not been followed 

  There was also: 
no lift plan 
no documented toolbox talk 
no identification/verification of the load weight 
a lack of basic safety awareness 

– 
– 
– 
– 

The company noted the following lessons learnt and recommendations, some of which have wider application: 

  Safety management system procedures should be followed at all times. 

  Efficient and effective supply chain management is particularly important for safety-critical suppliers  

  Ensure lifting procedures are up to date and followed, including 

lifting risk assessment 
lift plans 
lifting toolbox talks 
lifting checklists 

– 
– 
– 
– 
–  management of change procedures 

  Re-assess roles and responsibilities of supervisory staff at mobilizations and during lifting operations 

 

Identify through audit specialist lifting companies and establish an ‘approved vendors list’ for safety-critical suppliers. 

 

Safety Flash 

 

