AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/13 

Safety Flash 

October 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  What is a Safety Flash? 

IMCA  safety  flashes  and  systems  for  incident  reporting  and  analysis  are  an  important  tool  for  sharing  vital  information.  
By publishing  them,  IMCA  helps  its  members  around  the  world  identify  potential  hazards,  share  lessons  learnt  and  avoid 
repetition.  Any member can submit material to incidentreports@imca-int.com.  All submissions are handled in the strictest 
confidence, with information anonymised, checked before issue and published only with clear permission from the originator.  
Safety flashes should be succinct, specific, factually correct and written in clear language.  The secretariat will assist with this 
through formatting and checking of the material submitted.  

When  a  member  incident  report  is  received  by  IMCA,  it  will  firstly  be  reviewed  by  a  technical  adviser.    A  draft  “IMCA 
version” of the incident will be prepared, and this will be sent back for review to the originator.  No further action is taken 
until the originator signals clearly that the incident is OK to be published.  Sometimes a number of iterations of this process 
are required before the incident report is ready for publication. 

IMCA remains aware that it is sometimes necessary for members to take legal advice before sharing incident information, and 
we  would  stress  that  published  safety  flashes  are  always  completely  anonymous.    IMCA  does  encourage  members  to 
continue to share information about incidents, hazards and lessons learnt, as far as is reasonably practical. 

Sometimes IMCA receives links or references to incidents published by other organisations (for example, the Marine Safety 
Forum (MSF)), or to incidents that are otherwise already in the public domain.  If it is considered that further sharing of these 
incidents would be of use and interest to members, we will create a short note within a safety flash providing a link to that 
incident. 

Members can help by following a number of pointers:  

  The title should be concise and focus on the main issue; 

  The focus should be on lessons learnt and how to prevent a recurrence, rather than on the incident itself; 

  The content should be succinct, specific and, as far as possible, a common theme or pattern should be followed: 

-  What happened?  An incident or an issue will be described; 
-  Why?  What were the immediate causes and, if appropriate, the root causes; 
-  Learning: what can members learn from this? 
-  Action: what are the recommendations for members? 

 

Ideally there should be photographs or illustrations. 

A  safety  flash  incident  report  should  provide  sufficient  detail  and  communicate  risks,  precautions  and  necessary  actions 
effectively without releasing information about the people or organisations involved.  For further information, please contact 
the secretariat.  

 
2  Fatality – Man Overboard 

A member has reported an incident in which a crew member was lost overboard and drowned whilst working on a load on 
deck near to the side of the vessel.  The incident occurred when a team of riggers was working on deck at night securing a 
load composed of two metal elements (bulwarks) one on top of the other.  One of the riggers was approximately 3 metres 
to one side, in an area where temporary barriers were installed to prevent falling into the sea.  During the operation, there 
was  an  unexpected  movement  of  the  metal  structure  on  the  top  in  the  direction  of  the  vessel  side.    The  rigger  moved 
backwards to avoid the movement of the load toward his position; after 2-3 steps back he fell backward and passed through 
the barriers, falling into the sea. 

The rigger was not wearing a life jacket.  The sea state was critical (1.25-2.5 metres swell) and he was not able to reach the 
life buoys that were launched.  The rescue craft reached him and recovered him; the casualty was back on board the vessel 
eight minutes after the MOB alarm had been raised.  Unfortunately, efforts to resuscitate him were in vain. 

Position of worker as upper element started to move 

 

 

 

One of the stanchions for holding 
in place was missing (its support 
was partially covered by plate) 

 

Showing site of incident 

An investigation revealed the following: 

  The area where the injured person was working (3m away from side) had been previously risk assessed as “safe” with 

regard to the risk of falling into the sea, and so the requirement for a life jacket had not been identified for the task; 

  During the operation, the worker was positioned “in the line of fire” of the metal bulwark element on the top; 

  Temporary  barriers  were  found  not  appropriate,  just  beside  the  workplace  of  the  injured  person,  due  to  a  missing 

stanchion for holding barriers. 

The following lessons were drawn: 

side; 

  Risk of fall overboard should be considered not only for work over the side but also for work in close proximity to the 

  The suitability of temporary barriers should be assessed before the start of the tasks in close proximity; 

 
  Housekeeping should be of the highest standard to eliminate any unnecessary slip, trip and fall hazards; 

  All  personnel  taking  part  in  a  task  should  attend  a  toolbox  talk  (TBT)  and  a  job  safety  analysis  (JSA)  and/or  risk 

assessment (RA) discussion before starting; 

 

In a MOB scenario, a constructive working relationship between marine crew and project crew is vital. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

  A new risk assessment for bulwark removal and storage; 

  Reinforce implementation of safe system of work; 

  Verify  vessel  search  light  possible  improvements  and  purchase  night  visors  and  personal  locator  beacons  in  order  to 

improve the performance of MOB rescue; 

  Replacement of missing post in port side temporary over-the-side protection; 

 

Increase housekeeping control on the deck; 

  Complete  audit  and  evaluation  of  MOB  emergency  procedure  to  be  carried  out  utilising  all  required  emergency 

equipment. 

3 

Irukandji Jellyfish Awareness (Australia) 

A member has asked IMCA to raise awareness amongst divers and dive supervisors of the presence of Irukandji Jellyfish in 
certain Australian waters.  Members are encouraged to pass this information so that personnel are aware of the presence of 
Irukandji Jellyfish and if encountered, to recognise the signs and symptoms of a sting and the initial first aid treatment. 

There are at least 10 species of Irukandji known, ranging from as small as 1cm to over 10cm in diameter; all are transparent 
and virtually invisible in water which makes them difficult for swimmers and/or divers to notice.  Irukandji are most likely to 
be found in Australian tropical waters (see map).  The normal Irukandji season begins from November through to May. 

 (L) Irukandji jellyfish (R) Areas in which Irukandji jellyfish are most likely to be found 

Signs and Symptoms: The initial minor skin sting is followed 5-40min later by severe generalised muscular pain, headache, 
vomiting and sweating.  The sting from some species can cause very high blood pressure or have effects on the heart which 
may be life threatening.  These combined symptoms are sometimes referred to as ‘Irukandji Syndrome’. 

First Aid: As with all tropical Jellyfish stings the victim should be doused with vinegar. 

  Call for help or send someone for help; 

  Treat the victim (provide emergency CPR if necessary).  Apply 100% oxygen if patient is at an ambient pressure where it 

 

is safe to do so; 

  Treat the sting (flood with vinegar), do not rub or apply freshwater; 

  Seek medical assistance (transport to hospital). 

Further  notes:  Particular  care  is  to  be  taken  when  dressing  the  diver  to  ensure  all  exposed  skin  is  covered,  and  any 
potential exposure is considered, for example taping gloves to sleeves and exposed skin around the neck area. 

 
Often the greatest threat is not to the diver but to tenders on deck handling divers’ umbilicals and associated lines that have 
been submerged.  Great care should be taken by topside personnel, paying particular attention to covering exposed skin by 
wearing gloves and long sleeve coveralls at all times. 

Ensure  that  topside  personnel  working  in  such  waters  look  for  the  presence  of  Irukandji  and  other  marine  stingers  on 
equipment  and  wash  down  equipment  thoroughly.    Ensure  all  personnel  are  familiar  with  the  location  of  vinegar  and 
associated first aid equipment, and its use. 

If hot water suits are being used in tropical waters (for example, by saturation divers) there should be adequate filtration  of 
water  intakes  in  place  to  prevent  jellyfish,  or  parts  of  jellyfish,  from  being  drawn  into  the  hot  water  suit  intakes  and  then 
being  pumped  down  to  the  divers’  hot  water  suits.   Sufficient  PPE  to  prevent  jellyfish  stings  should  be  worn  by  anyone 
required to clean such water intake filters.   

4  LTI: Crewman Injured Foot during Offshore Renewables Mooring Operation 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  marine  crewman  sustained  a  serious  injury  to  his  foot  during  a  routine 
mooring operation.  The incident occurred during cable laying operations on an offshore renewables project. 

A  DP2  construction  vessel  and  a  number  of  purpose  built  crew  transfer  vessels  (CTVs)  were  being  used,  the  CTVs  to 
transfer work parties between the DP vessel and wind turbine towers.  When transfers are completed the CTVs routinely 
moor up to one of the turbine towers until required.  This enables them to save fuel.  The mooring uses a 100 metre length 
of rope which is attached to the bow of the CTV at one end of the rope.  The rope is then fed around an upright stanchion 
on the tower and the second end attached to another point on the bow of the vessel.  The CTV then backs off from the 
tower and is held down-tide approximately 50 metres from the tower until required.  This operation requires that around 
100 metres of rope are lying on the foredeck before the CTV backs away from the tower. 

Background 

The incident 

During a mooring operation one of the CTV’s crewmen attached the rope in the manner described above.  He signalled to 
the Master in the wheelhouse that he was clear to back away from the tower.  He then stepped out of sight of the Master.  
The  Master  applied  full  reverse  power  briefly,  to  get  away  safely  from  the  tower,  then  put  the  engines  into  neutral.  
The crewman  was  then  seen  being  dragged  by  the  foot,  which  was  attached  to  the  mooring  line,  across  the  foredeck.  
The rope  pulled  him  into  a  gap  between  the  hand  rail  sections  causing  a  serious  injury  to  his  foot.    The  operation  was 
stopped and the CTV called for assistance.  Medics from the DP2 vessel attended and provided initial treatment before the 
crewman was conveyed by helicopter to hospital.  As a result of the injury the crewman suffered a partial amputation to his 
foot which included the loss of his toes. 

An investigation is still underway, but the following early findings were: 

  There should have been formal procedures in place for this operation; 

  The crewman should not have been working alone; 

  There should have been an identified area where the crewman could safely stand during the operation, ideally where he 

could be seen by the vessel Master; 

  A CCTV installation would have meant that the Master could see the operation taking place from the wheelhouse; 

  There should have been voice communication between the crew operating on the foredeck and the Master; 

  The mooring should have used a shorter length of rope. 

In  any  mooring  operation  there  is  always  the  potential  for  crew  entanglement  with  the  mooring  ropes,  or  for  a  rope  to 
become over tensioned and break causing the rope to whip across the deck and injure anyone standing within its range.  

Members’ attention is drawn to the following IMCA documents: 

IMCA SEL 029 – Mooring practice safety guidance for offshore vessels when alongside in ports and harbours; 

 

 

IMCA safety poster 12 – Mooring safety. 

 
5 

 Hand Injuries 

Incident 1 

Incident 2 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the two following safety flashes regarding hand injuries. 

A crewman suffered crush injuries when his hand was caught between a small boat and a davit frame as the small boat was 
being recovered.  The incident occurred because he put his hand out to steady himself, didn’t look where he put his hand and 
inadvertently 
from 
http://www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.33.pdf. 

frame.  The 

downloaded 

it  on 

placed 

safety 

davit 

flash 

FRC 

can 

the 

be 

Whilst unpacking supplies, someone received a 1.5 to 2.0cm cut to the back of his left hand between his index and middle 
finger.  The injury was caused by an old packing knife blade of approximately 7cm.  It was not known how or why the blade 
came to be in the box.  The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-
safety-flash-13.40.pdf  

Members are reminded that IMCA has published a pocket safety card on hand safety: IMCA SPC 08 – Watch Your hands. 

