AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/16 

Safety Flash 

  February 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

In the interest of timely publication, this safety flash is a combination of different incidents.  We again cover the 
issue of downdraft from helicopter rotors; a near miss incident during a shallow water saturation dive involving a 
diver’s umbilical becoming fouled (no harm came to the diver); and a failure to follow instructions on the part of a 
senior crew member that led to him slipping on deck during rough weather and breaking his arm.   Finally, two 
recent email scams highlight the importance to members of good IT security or cybersecurity. 

1  Helicopter Rotor Downdraft Hazards - Oil & Gas UK (OGUK) 

Following a recent near miss incident, OGUK has drawn attention to the hazards of blown objects from helicopter 
downdraft, particularly where loose or inadequately secured equipment has been lifted into the air and fallen either 
overboard or been dropped onto a lower area of the vessel or installation. 

An S92A helicopter landed on a platform helideck, and the downdraft force lifted and blew two bags, each weighing 
10kg, from the baggage cage.  They landed on a lower level 10m below – fortunately no personnel were on the 
lower level at the time. 

OGUK also note the following previous occurrences: 

  An aluminium locker was situated on a level below the helideck – a door was detached by the helicopter 

downdraft; 

  A wooden crate lid blew off and went over a handrail and into the sea; 

  Two large mats were lifted from the deck area during helicopter operations – this incident resulted in one 

mat landing on the deck below. 

Similar  incidents  keep  occurring  in  other  parts  of  the  world.    All  of  these  objects  were  unsecured  and/or 
inadequately stored.  All incidents had the potential to cause serious injury to personnel or damage to the vessel 
or the platform structure – or in some cases the helicopter. 

With regard to helicopter downdraft, OGUK provides the following information: 

  Rotor  downdraft  forces,  combined  with  prevailing  wind  speeds,  can  generate  winds  equivalent  to  a 

Category 1 Hurricane over distances of 25m from the aircraft; 

  Very heavy objects within the downdraft zone can become airborne if not restrained;  

  Unsecured/unlocked locker doors in the vicinity of helidecks have been found to be a hazard due to high 

winds and helicopter operations;  

 

  Wooden crates and loose equipment may be at particular risk – the following points should be noted: 

– 

Lockers, wooden crates and loose equipment are often stored in areas that may become exposed 
to  high  winds  or  helicopter  downdraft.    Consideration  should  be  given  to  the  object  becoming 
lighter and more susceptible to high winds or helicopter downdraft once opened and equipment is 
removed 

–  Adverse weather guidelines and checklists should be used when adverse weather is forecast – these 

should include checking that pallets, crates and lids are secured or sheltered 

–  Crate lids can sometimes be inadequately re-secured due to existing nail/pin holes being used to 

fasten the lid 

–  Where a secondary securing method is applied it can sometimes be ineffective or inappropriate 
e.g., ad hoc equipment or weight being placed on top of the lid to hold it down.  This equipment or 
weight is often removed for various reasons by persons unknown. 

Members may wish to: 

  Review risk assessments and assure robust procedures are in place; 

  Ensure that HLOs and helideck crews are fully aware of the risks involved;  

  Use  team  briefings  and  tool  box  talks  to  raise  awareness  of  windblown  objects  caused  by  helicopter 

downdraft or severe weather; 

  Make careful checks of all areas adjacent to the landing area and flight path to identify areas at particular 
risk.  Secure or remove all materials susceptible to rotor downwash before flight arrival and take off, and 
ensure such checks are discussed during tool box talks; 

  Confirm that lockers and wooden crates are stored in an appropriate location not exposed to high winds or 

helicopter downdraft, and include the requirement for secondary securing method to be applied.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search word: downwash): 

 

IMCA SF 08/14 – Incident 2 – Unsecured object lifted by helicopter downwash (this incident may be the same 
one as the second one identified above by OGUK). 

2  Near Miss: Fouled Diver Umbilical 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver’s umbilical became fouled around a seawater discharge caisson.  
The incident happened during a shallow water saturation dive (15msw), whilst using extended umbilicals routed 
through a submerged intermediate hoop to reach the worksite from the diving bell. 

The diver had made his way to the structure through the hoop.  He was preparing to move into the structure by 
pulling the required length of slack umbilical through to his location at the edge of the structure, before moving to 
the work location.  This meant the diver had to pull through approximately 23m of working umbilical in order to 
access the job, which was in the centre of the jacket.  The umbilical was slightly negatively buoyant.  Whilst the 
diver was pulling through the 23m of working slack at the jacket, a bight formed below him.  The bight was carried 
by  the  prevailing  current  (which  was  setting  towards  the  aerated  discharge),  and  was  drawn  into  the  aerated 
discharge.  As the caisson base was only 2m below the 15m elevation, the aerated water lifted the bight of umbilical 
upwards and around the caisson resulting in diver 2 being unable to pull through his slack. 

The platform was subsequently shut down to allow the umbilical to be freed.  Both divers then returned safely to 
the diving bell and the bell was recovered to the vessel. 

 

 

 

 

Camera view of fouled umbilical. 

Our member noted the following contributory or underlying causes: 

  The risk assessment identified the caisson as a hazard, but did not identify the aerated nature of the water 

around the caisson discharge as a hazard; 

  The risk assessment did not identify that ‘safe’ standoff distances should take into account the maximum 
length of a diver’s ‘slack’ umbilical that could be deployed in conjunction with tidal direction etc., when 
establishing safe standoff distances; 

  The aerated nature of the water was considered a nuisance rather than a hazard with regard to the divers’ 

umbilical. 

The following lessons were learnt: 

  Take into account the length and potential route/location of the diver’s umbilical in relation to discharges 

and other hazards (inlet and outlets, snagging points) in addition to the physical location of the diver; 

  Understand that gas entrained discharges can produce significant general upward flow of the surrounding 

water in their location even if the outflow from the discharge is downward. 

Our member suggested the following immediate actions:  

  Ensure all potential hazards are considered during umbilical management – and not just vessel thrusters; 

  Take  into  account  diver  routing  and  access  and  umbilical  management  techniques  during  pre-job 

  Ensure specific review of the risks of working on extended umbilicals and/or within structures is considered 

engineering; 

during the risk assessment process. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: fouled): 

 

IMCA SF 01/10 –  Incident 1 – Diver fouled on descending load. 

 
3 

Slip/Trip Resulting in Lost Time Injury (LTI) 

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman slipped on deck and fell, resulting in a broken arm.  The 
incident  occurred  when  the  chief  engineer  was  returning  to  the  engine  room  from  the  bridge  via  the 
accommodation.  In spite of instructions to stop personnel going on deck during heavy weather, the chief engineer 
decided to leave the accommodation in the winch housing area to return to the machinery spaces.  

Outside, there was a small raised deck area, with two steps 
down to the main deck.  The non-skid paint in this area was 
worn and as the chief engineer stepped out onto this area he 
slipped and fell forward.  His fall and impact caused a fracture 
of his right upper arm.  He received first aid treatment on-
board, before being medevac’d ashore for further treatment. 

The diagram to the right shows the injured persons path and 
incident  cause.    He  left  the  accommodation  via  Position  1 
into the winch housing area.  

At Position 2, there was a small raised deck area, with two 
steps down to the main deck. Here he slipped and fell. 

As he fell, he hit the watertight door in Position 3, which was 
secured open.  This impact caused a fracture of his right arm. 

Our member notes the following: 

  That morning, the vessel Master had held a training brief 

on the bridge, advising all personnel of: 
  hazards during heavy weather;  
 

the need to keep all external doors closed; 

 

restrictions on using external decks. 

  The  chief  engineer  misunderstood  and/or  chose  to 
ignore the instructions in the briefing and the instructions 
painted on doors themselves (see image, first right); 

  Between the accommodation and the winch housing, the 
internal door was closed but the external, weathertight 
door remained open (see image, second right); 

  Between  the  winch  housing  into  the  machinery  space 

stairwell, the external watertight door remained open; 

  The raised deck and steps in this area did not have any 

weathertight openings had been closed and secured; 

  No-one exercised the STOP WORK POLICY; 

Our member suggested the following particular lessons: 

non-skid painting or coating applied – this was known but had not been previously addressed; 

  Despite  the  proactive  briefing  held,  there  was  no  requirement  to  conduct  rounds  and  verify  that  all 

  Remain proactive – particularly in unusual operational or working conditions; 

  Go beyond checklists – don’t be afraid to go above and beyond these requirements to further enhance safety;  

  Safety briefing apply to ALL PERSONNEL – regardless of rank or role; 

  Follow  ALL  warning  signs  –  if  a  door  says  “KEEP  CLOSED  AT  SEA”,  then  keep  it  closed  at  sea  regardless  of 

previous practice;   

 
  Particular care  should be taken with maintaining  watertight  integrity and ensuring  that  all watertight  doors 
remain closed at all times when at sea.  Always STOP WORK in unsafe conditions.  If you encounter unsafe 
conditions, then STOP THE JOB and ensure all hazards are corrected before allowing anyone else to continue. 

Members may wish to refer to IMCA Safety Flash 20/15 the focus of which is slips, trips and falls.  

4 

False or Scam Emails - Warning 

IMCA seeks to bring to the attention of members the increased risk to businesses of email fraud.  Two events in 
2015 serve to highlight this risk.  Both of them were attempts to defraud business organisations using email.  One 
of them, sadly, was successful. 

Incident 1  

Incident 2  

A  member  has  reported  an  attempt  in  which  a 
company  was  defrauded  of  several  hundred 
thousand dollars through email fraud.    The  incident 
occurred  when  the  company  was  seeking  to 
legitimately purchase reconditioned equipment from 
a vendor in a different part of the world.  

This  was  a  deliberate  attempt  to  defraud  lasting 
several  weeks,  involving  more  than  one  email.    By 
using a subtle and difficult to notice change to email 
addresses,  the  fraudster  was  able  to  persuade 
employees  of  the  company  to  transfer  funds  into  a 
bank  account  other  than  that  specified  by  the  true 
vendor of the equipment.  

the  banks 

Whilst the incident was reported to the local police, 
to 
the 
international  nature  of  the  fraud  meant  that  the 
funds could not be recovered. 

involved  and  to 

Interpol, 

Information  has  been  brought  to  IMCA’s  attention 
regarding a scam or fraud attempt made, whereby an 
“internal” email was received which purported to be 
from a Chief Executive.  The email appeared to come 
from the correct and bona fide email address; it was 
personally  addressed  to  the  correct  person  dealing 
with such matters, and it contained clear instructions, 
again  ostensibly  from  the  CEO,  to  pass  certain 
confidential  details 
to  certain  private  email 
addresses.   

It  was  a  fake  “phishing”  email  –  an  inappropriate 
attempt,  by  persons  unknown, 
to  extract 
information.  Members should be aware of the risks 
of email theft and scamming of this sort and should 
be alert to the possibility that emails that appear to 
be from legitimate email addresses may prove to be 
fake.  

As  with  bank  phishing  scam  emails,  close  attention 
should  be  paid  to  the  details  of  wording,  spelling, 
grammar  and context,  which  often  provide  clues  to 
the fact that an email is fake.  In the above example, 
the  suggested  use  of  private  email  addresses  for 
professional purposes was the clue to the email being 
a scam.  In this case, the attempt to defraud was not 
successful.  

Members may have been aware of recent news items 
about  “CEO  scam”,  where  ostensibly 
legitimate 
instructions,  often  for  transfer  of  funds,  appear  to 
arrive from the CEO of an organisation. 

Lessons learnt: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Members should remain vigilant, liaise with their own IT departments and to continue to work to ensure the safety 
and security of their internal and external email communications. 

To reiterate, close attention should be paid to the following: 

  Changes to bank account numbers, addresses of legal entities or any other significant information; 

 
  Details of wording, spelling, grammar and context – these can often provide clues to the fact that an email is 

  The use of private or personal email addresses in the business world.  This can sometimes – but not always – 

  Subtle changes to the email address or to the servers or internet domains from which they are sent; 

  Links provided which may inappropriately divert the user to websites other than those intended for business 

fake; 

be a clue;  

use. 

It is of particular importance to take care when there is unfamiliarity with terminology or when administration of 
this sort is being carried out by persons whose first language may not be the same language as that in which the 
business communication is taking place. 

IMCA has a Security workgroup that is a workgroup of the Safety, Environment & Legislation (SEL) Core Committee.  
Though initially created to address piracy and the International Ship & Port Facility Security (ISPS) code, part of its 
work today is to address “cyber security” issues of this sort.  Further information can be found from IMCA technical 
adviser Chris Baldwin chris.baldwin@imca-int.com  

More information on the CEO email scam can be found here.  

