AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/09 

Safety Flash 

September 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety matters  and incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons learned  from  them.    The information  below has been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Use of Pre-Mixed Nitrox Gases 

An incident has been brought to IMCA’s attention where premixed cylinders or quads of nitrox gas may not have had the 
necessary oxygen content to sustain safe diving and the cylinder or quad may not, in fact, have contained the mix that was 
indicated on the label and/or accompanying paperwork. 

In a recent near-miss incident, a contractor was conducting diving operations using third-party-supplied cylinders and quads 
of premixed nitrox via a dive control panel arrangement that fortunately included in-line gas analysers. 

In a situation where the nitrox mix should have had a 36% oxygen content, during the operational monitoring process the 
contractor  chose  to  immediately  suspend  diving  operations  when  a  reading  of  32%  oxygen  content  was  observed  by  the 
panel operator and supervisor.  Further tests were conducted which verified that the nitrox gas supplied was not the correct 
gas mix for safe diving operations. 

During subsequent testing of both the cylinders and quad contents, an oxygen content of approximately 15% was observed in 
some  cylinders,  a  percentage  well  below  that  specified  and  at  a  level  where  a  serious  incident  could  have  resulted.    Since 
there is an obvious increased risk of decompression sickness when the oxygen content of the nitrox mix required is less than 
the oxygen content specified in the decompression tables being used, attention to detail is critical.  In this instance it was only 
the vigilance of the contractor that detected the problem before an incident occurred. 

The following lessons may be drawn: 

  The mix of the gas should be clearly specified to any third party supplier and knowledge of their quality assurance system 

known and understood before an order is accepted for operational use; 

  Cylinders  and  quads  delivered  from  third  parties  should  have  their  gas  content  analysed  after  delivery  and  certainly 

before first use on site; 

  The use of panel mounted in-line gas analysers has proved to be extremely beneficial in this case; 

  Particular attention should be paid to individual bottles within their racks as any bad mix could dilute easily into the pack 

and not be found.  If such a bottle were utilised as a single source for supply it would be particularly dangerous. 

