AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/16 

Safety Flash 

  May 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This safety flash covers three dropped object incidents.  Members are reminded that IMCA has recently published 
a new video on dropped objects – IMCA SEL 039 – Technip DROPS.  This video highlights the importance of safe 
working practices not only to offshore personnel but also to their families at home.  The video is available from the 
IMCA  website  http://www.imca-int.com/safety-environment-and-legislation/safety-environment-and-legislation-
videos/sel-039.aspx.  

1 

Serious Incident: Pad Eye Fell From Crane Boom and Struck Rigger 

A member has reported a potentially very serious near miss incident in 
which a crewman was struck by a falling object.  The incident took place 
when a 50 Te deck crane had just recovered a high pressure running tool 
and was being placed back into the boom rest.  A rigger was preparing to 
secure a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) hook into a safe recess when a 
fixed pad eye (1.78 kg) on the knuckle boom broke free, fell 8.5 metres 
and  struck  the  rigger.    The  pad  eye  hit  a  glancing  blow  on  his  safety 
helmet  and  down  to  his  right  forearm.    The  rigger  was  unharmed  and 
after examination he was cleared for full duties. 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following:  

 

 

the  pad  eye  was  damaged  and  extensively  corroded,  likely  from 
unreported impact or damage; 

the pad eye’s poor condition and corrosion was not identified by a 
number of persons, though there had been a number of inspections 
and  checks  over  several  months.    However  defects  had  become 
‘normalised’; 

  a previous unreported or unnoticed damage to the crane boom pad 

eye had occurred;  

  when the crane was stowed on the crane rest, the pad eye on the knuckle boom was seen to be too close to 

the crane rest.  This increased the likelihood of operator error and clashes. 

 
Our member suggested the following actions: 

  assess all crane booms for potential for boom/crane rest damage or clashes; 

  ensure  that  crane  checks  and  inspections  are  carried  out  regularly  and 

thoroughly, particularly checking corrosion, damage or defects; 

 

check carefully to ensure that crane boom rests, and the likelihood of dropped 
objects  from  crane  boom  and  rests,  are  included  in  crane  inspections  and 
dropped object surveys. 

Members  will  be  aware  that  in  recent  times  there  have  been  a  number  of 
incidents reported in which objects have fallen from the crane itself.  This incident 
forms  a  timely  reminder  to  redouble  our  efforts  to  check  areas  that  might 
otherwise be overlooked in the search for potential dropped objects. 

Members  may  wish  to  refer  to  the  following  incidents  (search  words:  crane, 
dropped): 

IMCA SF 02/15 – Incident 1 – Dropped object near miss: falling crane block; 

IMCA SF 10/15 – Incident 1 – Near miss: dropped object fell from crane boom; 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 1 – High potential near miss: safe working load (SWL) plate fell from crane auxiliary 
block; and Incident 2 – Dropped object near miss: small parts falling from crane rest. 

Members are also reminded of IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

2  Potential Dropped Object – Inbound Cargo 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  a  safety  alert  regarding  a  potential 
dropped object.  Back-loading of a large piece of equipment took place from an offshore 
location.  Subsequently on the quayside it was discovered that a steel blanking plate had 
been stored in the fork-lift pocket of this piece of equipment whilst it had been in service 
offshore.  The unit had been offshore for around two years.  This plate had potential to 
cause serious harm had it fallen out and dropped. 

Further  information  is  available  at  http://www.marinesafetyforum.org/images/msf-
safety-alert-16.04.pdf.  Members may also wish to review the following similar incidents 
(search words: cargo, dropped, potential): 

IMCA SF 08/11 – Incident 2 – Recent near miss incidents involving potential dropped objects; 

IMCA SF 19/14 – Incident 3 – Near miss: dropped object from cargo. 

3  Dropped Object – Tank Dog 

The MSF has published a safety alert regarding an incident in which a hatch securing ‘dog’ 
was found on the cargo deck of a platform supply vessel (PSV).  The item was close to the 
stowage position of a back-loaded tank.  It was established that the grub screw holding the 
anchor pin in place had worked loose, allowing the ‘dog’ to come adrift and fall to the deck 
of the vessel.  

Further information can be found from  http://www.marinesafetyforum.org/images/msf-
safety-alert-16.08.pdf. 

 Members may wish to review the following similar incident (search word: grub screw): 

 

IMCA SF 04/10 – Incident 2 – Falling object. 

 

 

 

 

 

