AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/03 

December 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Faulty Directional Flow Arrow on Valve 

Keywords: Umbilical 

A member has reported the following safety issue concerning incorrectly machined valves. 

During  general  maintenance  on  a  diver’s  emergency  gas  manifold  which  was  fitted  in  an  air  diving  basket,  a  technician 
discovered that three valves were apparently fitted such that the flow through the valve body was in the reverse direction to 
the correct path.  On close inspection, the technician identified that the valves had been incorrectly machined, in that the 
directional arrow on the outside of the valve body was in the wrong orientation to the correct porting arrangement 

The valves concerned, which were all similar, were designed to be directional and were marked with an arrow on the side of 
the valve body.  The arrow was intended to ensure that gas or fluid entered the inlet port and exited through the outlet 
port.  The ports themselves were not marked, but the inlet should have had an entry hole at the bottom of the valve body 
and the outlet should have a hole at the top of the valve body.  This orientation would have ensured that the gas/fluid flow 
correctly  pressurised  the  valve  seal,  which  was  controlled  by  the  spindle.    The  three  faulty  valves  had  been  machined 
incorrectly with reference to the external arrow direction, resulting in incorrect gas/fluid flow through the valve.  This could 
potentially have caused the seat on the valve stem to have become detached, so that it could enter the gas or fluid system.  In 
this case, it could have caused the valve seat to enter a diver’s umbilical, with very serious consequences. 

The  valve  in  question  is  a  commonly  used  type  with  3/8”  female  ports.    The  company  involved  had  used  dozens  of  these 
valves for some years at one base and has undertaken checks throughout its locations.  It is working with its supplier, which 
is in turn liaising with the manufacturer to try to identify whether other faulty valves have been supplied to the industry at 
large  and  to  ensure  that  checks  in  the  manufacturing  process  prevent  a  similar  fault  from  occurring  in  the  future.    The 
supplier (Hydrasun) has also issued a notice to its customers on this subject, which is attached. 

The member has issued its own internal company notice which advises as follows: 

 

It is essential that the checks be carried out immediately on all systems fitted with such valves.  Priority should be given 
to valves contained in breathing or diving systems; 

  Checks should make sure that the porting matches the arrow direction; 

  Checks should also ensure that the inlet hole is machined on the bottom of the inlet port and that the outlet hole is 
machined on the top of the outlet port.  This can be done either by removing the valve completely or by removing the 
valve stem and checking the position of the ports through the seat cavity.  Where the valve is not removed completely, 
it should be double checked and confirmed by a second technician; 

  Any valves used in such situations which do not have any directional arrow should be withdrawn from service; 

  Checks should be carried out to ensure that valves are appropriate for their purpose.  Single-directional valves should 

not be used in bi-directional systems, particularly where high pressure gas or fluid is required to flow in both directions 

Members  will  want  to  review  the  above  and  the  attached  notice  and  consider  their  own  company  action  and 
recommendations.  For further details on the Hydrasun notice, please visit www.hydrasun.com for contact information. 

 

2 

Keywords:  

Incident Involving a McKissick N419 Snatch Block 

IMCA recently received notification of an incident involving a particular type of snatch block, which could be knocked apart if 
the bolt and hairpin were removed and the block left open in an unloaded condition.  In the incident described to IMCA, a 
component part had been knocked free and dropped from a height.  

Correspondence between IMCA and the manufacturer showed that blocks produced prior to 1991 allowed removal of the 
head  fitting,  albeit  after  removal  of  the  hairpin  and  bolt  and  rotation  of  the  head  fitting  to  an  extreme  position.    Blocks 
produced since 1991 have a feature that requires a deliberate component removal to allow the head fitting to be removed 
when the block is open.  There is a possibility that old, pre-1991 versions of the block are still in use. 

We have subsequently received a third-party notice which gives the following additional information and guidance for its own 
operations which members may find of use: 

 

The  N419  “Old  Style”  was  designed 
to  allow 
interchangeable  fittings  as  can  be  seen  in  the  above 
photograph.  The  design  utilised  a  “triangle”  shaped 
spool  that  allowed  the  head  fitting  to  be  rotated  to  an 
extreme  position  and  removed  after  the  side  plate  has 
been opened. 

The  head  fitting  on  the  current  N419  McKissick 
Snatch  Block  is  secured  to  the  block  with  a 
threaded  round  nut  that  is  staked  to  the  spool. 
This  feature  prevents  the  head  fitting  from  being 
removed from the block, regardless of the position. 

The  company involved has banned  the use  at  its  worksites  of  the  McKissick  N419  Snatch block  in figure  A,  whose  design 
allowed for interchangeable head fittings as depicted in figure A.   

The  Crosby  Group  Inc.  (manufacturer  of  the  McKissick  N419)  has  since  1991  added  features  to  retain  the  head  fitting 
regardless of the position of the block (Figure B).  Both snatch blocks carry the same name, but production of the snatch 
block in figure A was discontinued in 1991. 

As a result the company will not use the ‘old style’ snatch block (figure A) in its operations.  

The company instigated the following actions for all of its installations: 

  Check all snatch blocks on installations, and remove from service the ‘old style’ McKissick N419 snatch block; 

  For  applications  where  this  type  of  device  is  required,  ensure  that  the  current  Mckissick  N419  snatch  block  is  used 

(Figure B); 

  Make sure that all inventory lists of loose lifting appliances are updated with necessary information 

3 

Incorrect Pressure-Rated Manifold Fitted to Diver’s Bail-Out 

A member has reported an incident in which a manifold rated to 232 bar was fitted to a twin cylinder 300 bar bail-out. 

The manifold in question had no pressure rating markings, as shown in the first picture below.  The correct manifold is easily 
identifiable as it has its pressure rating marked clearly about the DIN female connection, as shown in the second picture. 

 

 

Pressure rating of 300bar marked on manifold 

No pressure rating marked 

 

 

The  company  has  reminded  its  personnel  that  the  fitting  of  correct  pressure  items  is  crucial  in  ensuring  that  a  system 
conforms to safe design criteria and has instigated the following actions: 

  All bail-out assemblies are to be checked by dive technicians to ensure correctly rated manifolds are fitted; 

  Vessel-held stocks of bail-out manifolds are to be checked to ensure that only correctly rated and marked manifolds are 
in stock.  Any unmarked manifolds which are identified are to be quarantined and sent back to the company’s equipment 
department 

