AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/09 

Safety Flash 

June 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fatal Electrocution 

IMCA  has  learnt  of  a  fatal  incident  in  which  a  person  was  electrocuted.    A  rig  sub-contractor  suffered  fatal  injuries  from 
electrical shock whilst performing a welding operation.  A lamp used to illuminate the worksite was found to be a potential 
source of electrical shock as the lamp’s electrical cord was found to have been damaged.  The damage may have been caused 
by a pinching action of the cord between the loose mounting bracket of the light and the light housing which was observed to 
be in contact with the victim’s body. 

Damaged electrical cord 

 

Further investigation revealed the following: 

♦  A  ground  fault  circuit  interrupter  (GFCI)  was  not  utilised  and  the  circuit  breaker  did  not  trip  when  the  incident 

♦  The  lamp  used  was  designed  for  permanent  exterior  mounting  and  had  been  modified  for  use  as  an  interior  portable 

occurred; 

illumination source; 

♦  The approved job safety analysis (JSA) overlooked the potential for electric shock hazards and for cord damage and did 

♦  Sub-contractor personnel had not been effectively supervised; 

♦  An effective pre-job (pre-start) safety discussion had not taken place; 

not address the actual work that was performed; 

♦  Confined space entry was not considered or included in permits; 

♦  The hot work permit review process was not effective. 

 

The following lessons were learnt: 

♦  When using portable electric tools in potentially  damp areas,  a  GFCI (fixed or portable) should be utilised to protect 

personnel from potential electrical shock; 

♦  All tools and equipment should only be used for their intended and manufacturer’s recommended purpose; any change 
to  a  tool  or  equipment’s  intended  purpose  should  be  thoroughly  reviewed  and  approved  through  an  effective 
management of change (MoC) process; 

♦  An effective pre-start meeting should be held with the personnel performing the work to ensure that all hazards have 
been  identified,  proper  tools  are  being  utilised  and  the  job  scope  is  well  defined  and  understood.    The  supervisor  in 
charge of the worksite should be responsible for having this meeting.  A field review of the work site should be part of 
this meeting; 

♦ 

JSAs should be specific to the job being performed.  JSAs should focus on the steps taken to accomplish the task rather 
than  generalised  statements  that  cover  a  wide  range  of  activities.    JSAs  should  focus  on  hazard  identification  and 
mitigations for each hazard; 

♦  Established  procedures  for  issuing  and  approving  general  work  permits,  hot  work  permits,  and  confined  space  entry 
permits should be rigorously followed to ensure necessary steps have been taken to minimise risk of injury, including a 
survey of the work site by the person in charge. 

2  Electric Shock Near-Miss 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  employee  sustained  an  electrical  shock  whilst  re-routing  a  work  class 
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) tether.  The ROV and tether management system (TMS) have separate electrical supplies 
and separate electrical circuits.  At no point in the operation was power ever supplied to the ROV through the soft tether 
either deliberately or accidentally. 

The  ROV  electrical  power  was  isolated  and  locked  off  in  order  to  allow  ROV  personnel  to  remove  the  tether  from  the 
vehicle.  The TMS power supply was not locked off, in order to allow spooling to take place.  Prior to removing the tether 
from the ROV, technicians used the correct test equipment and earthing equipment to ensure that there was no electrical 
power at the topside power distribution junction box and at the subsea ROV junction box. 

During  the  rerouting  operation  the  TMS  single  phase  power  was  energised  to  pay  out  the  tether.    At  this  point  an  ROV 
technician received an electric shock to his wrist between his glove and coverall.  On investigation it was found that, with the 
TMS  single  phase  power  energised,  360V  AC  was  seen  on  the  vehicle  end  of  the  ROV  umbilical  instrument  conductors.  
When the TMS single phase was switched off it was then noticed the 360V AC had dropped to zero volts.  All of the wiring 
was as per specification, no wires were crossed. 

No injury was sustained and no medical treatment was required. 

High voltage (HV) junction box with earthing equipment attached 

 

Following investigation, the following points were noted: 

♦  A toolbox talk was carried out where the operation and safety aspects were discussed; 

♦  The immediate cause of the electric shock was the ROV technician coming into contact with a conductor at the end of 

the ROV tether; 

♦  This  conductor,  whilst  isolated  from  a  direct  power  source,  was  identified  as  having  an  induced  voltage  present.   The 

voltage was induced in the main lift umbilical on the deck winch; 

♦  One of the functions of the earthing equipment was to tie conductors to earth and eliminate any induced voltage that 
may be present.  On this occasion, two of the clips of the earthing equipment had become dislodged.  The ‘crocodile’ 
clip arrangement was found not to be a secure method of attaching such a safety critical device; 

♦  Some  of  the  persons  involved  with  this  earthing  equipment  had  not  fully  understood  the  criticality  of  the  equipment, 
particularly in the case of high voltage (3000V) and a long umbilical (3300m).  Nevertheless, this equipment was correctly 
used and all appropriate procedures were followed; 

♦  Personnel  needed  to  be  more  aware  of  induced  voltages  and  their  potential  to  be  fatal.    The  umbilical  manufacturer 
confirmed  that  the  induced  voltage  found  in  this  tether  was  potentially  fatal  rather  than  superficial  as  some  of  the 
persons involved had thought. 

The company has made the follow recommendations and corrective actions: 

♦ 

Improve design of earthing equipment in such a way as to remove the possibility of inadvertent disconnection; 

♦  Follow up with the manufacturer to include start up, induced voltage and isolation in training course material; 

♦  Ensure all personnel working on work class ROV systems have completed HV training courses; 

Ensure signage is posted at all high voltage junction boxes warning of HV dangers and necessity to use appropriate earthing 
equipment. 

3  Lifeboat D-Ring Failure 

Members’  attention  is  drawn  to  the  attached  document  from  the  Marine  Safety  Forum  regarding  the  failure  of  a  lifeboat 
D-ring. 

4  Worker Fatally Injured During Pipelay Operations 

Members’  attention  is  drawn  to  the  following  safety  flash  from  the  US  Department  of  the  Interior  MMS  (Minerals 
Management Service for the Gulf Coast Offshore continental shelf), regarding a fatal incident during pipelaying operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

Marine Safety Forum – Safety Flash 09/12 
 
 
Issued:  28th April 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Subject:  Lifeboat D-Ring Failure 
  
 
 
Summary:   
A  recent  incident  in  offshore  operations  highlighted  some  actions  related  to  lifeboat/Fast  Rescue 
Craft (FRC) maintenance that should be taken immediately.  During the incident, the lifeboat fall D-
ring failed while load testing the lifeboat and wire fall assembly. It was found that the failed D-ring 
was non-OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturer) and was of welded construction rather than the 
forged construction originally supplied by the OEM. 
ACTIONS FOR EACH SPU 
The immediate actions resulting from this incident are to: 
 
1)  

Only use OEM equipment on new and existing lifeboat/FRC and lifeboat/FRC 
fall assemblies, except when changes have been subject to the appropriate 
MOC and approved by the relevant Marine Authority; and 

Conduct all load testing, maintenance and inspection of lifeboat/FRC and 
lifeboat/FRC fall assemblies using detailed procedures that have been subject to 
a risk assessment and approved by the relevant Marine Authority. 

 

 

 

 
2)  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 U.S. Department of the Interior 
 Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 

        Safety  
             Alert 

Contact:  Manny Gagliano
(504) 736 2549

MMS 

Safety Alert No. 280 
May 13, 2009 
 

Worker Fatally Struck by Moving Pipe During Pipelay Operations 

A bevel machine operator was fatally injured on a pipelay barge when he was struck by moving 
pipe during pipelay operations.  An MMS investigation revealed that the conveyor system had 
become inadvertently energized and advanced pipe toward the ready rack where the bevel 
machine operator was working.  The moving pipe on the conveyor system struck the bevel 
machine operator in the back and pinned him between it and the end of a stationary pipe joint on 
the ready rack. 
 
The MMS investigation identified the following causes of the accident: 
 
1)  Inadequate hazard analyses and failure to adequately implement hazards analyses 

recommendations.  The recommended physical barriers such as guards or handrails in the 
pinch point area were not installed prior to the accident.   In addition, although close-circuit 
television cameras were installed as recommended, they were not working on the day of the 
accident.  

 
2)  Failure to adequately implement and adhere to recommendations of the job safety analysis 

(JSA).    The JSA recommended that personnel avoid working in pinch points areas and 
specifically to stand to the side of the pipe while grinding.  The JSA also indicated that 
personnel should not walk in pinch point areas, although the victim’s hand tools were stored 
such that he was required to pass through the pinch point to retrieve them from storage. 

  
Other contributing causes to the accident included: 
 
1.  The inadequacy of the JSA’s.  Job tasks were often vague rather than specific.  The JSA also 
did not include important steps in the task sequence, and did not address the  tasks of specific 
job functions individually or the methods they would use to communicate and coordinate 
their tasks. 

  
2.  Inadequate supervision.  The investigation found that it was routine for personnel to walk in 
and work in pinch point areas near the conveyor system.  MMS could find no evidence that 
supervisors, who routinely monitored the area, requested or required the crew to cease this 
practice.   

 

 

3.  Lack of a detailed written job description and formal training for bevel machine operators. 

The tasks specific to moving and hand grinding pipe were not included in the bevel machine 
operators’ job description.  There was also no specific training for the bevel machine 
operators’ other than on-the-job-training. 

 
4.  Failure of the bevel machine operator  to attend safety meetings. There was no evidence that 

the bevel machine operator attended any of the safety meetings. 

 
5.  Possible inadequate inspection/maintenance of the conveyor system control panel switches.  

There was no conclusive evidence that proves the condition of a conveyor switch was a 
contributing factor to the accident.  Third party analysis of the control panel switches after 
the accident found that a conveyor switch was prone to sticking and had damaged internal 
components.  This indicated possible lack of inspection and maintenance of the switch. 

 
Based on the investigation findings, MMS makes the following recommends to Lessees, 
Operators, and their contractors during pipelay operations: 
 

•  Safety barriers should be installed and maintained on pipe lay vessel conveyor systems to 

limit access to pinch point areas.   

•  Warning signs should be posted to alert personnel of pinch point areas. 

•  Supervisory observations should be conducted more frequently in order to monitor work 

habits of all personnel in all areas, particularly around pipe conveyor systems. 

•  Lessees should review the company’s safety meeting policies with contract personnel and 

express the importance of conducting safety meetings.  The Lessees should also 
emphasize that documentation of all meetings and those personnel in attendance is 
required.   

•  Contractors should consider installing CCTV cameras in conveyor system areas to allow 

for additional supervision of operations. 

•  Contractors should provide detailed written job descriptions and implement formal 

training for specific job duties and responsibilities rather than generalized job 
descriptions that cover several positions.  

• 

Inspection and maintenance guidelines should be provided for all safety equipment in 
place, and this equipment should be inspected for proper operation prior to the 
commencement of a project.  Any inoperable equipment should be repaired, replaced, 
and tested immediately.  Proper documentation of safety equipment inspection, 
maintenance, repairs, and test results should be maintained. 

 

 
  
 

--MMS--GOMR-- 

www.gomr.mms.gov 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

