AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/02 

September 2002 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of Bailout Regulator 

During routine maintenance of bail-out bottles on a members’ dive support vessel (DSV), a serious flaw was discovered on a 
first stage bail-out regulator.  When the relief valve was dismantled, it was found that two mild steel washers had been fitted 
to  the  valve  to  effectively  increase  the  spring  tension  to  allow  for  a  20 bar  pressure  release.    Both  washers  were  badly 
corroded and prevented operation of the relief valve. 

In a situation where a regulator fails because the relief valve is inoperable, there is potential for the low pressure (LP) hose to 
be  subjected  to  full  bail-out  pressure  of  300 bar.    New-type  LP  hoses  have  a  working  pressure  in  excess  of  60 bar  but, 
because of safety factors, will have a considerably higher burst pressure.  Thus there is potential to have full bailout pressure 
at the helmet emergency valve without the diver’s knowledge. 

When the history of the first stage regulator’s relief valve was investigated, the company involved could not trace when they 
had been delivered.  The manufacturer had no knowledge of such washers ever being fitted to its relief valves, as the normal 
relief valve setting from the manufacturer was 15 bar.  It is understood that that supplier manufactures special relief valve 
caps  to  allow  for  a  20 bar  pressure  relief,  but  this  was  based  on  different  spring  settings.    The  company’s  maintenance 
procedures  would  prohibit  such  materials  being  inserted  in  the  regulator  valves  and  documentary  evidence  of  when  this 
occurred could not be found. 

The  company  involved  is  concerned  that  this  may  not  be  an  isolated  case  of  incorrect  supply  or  maintenance  and  has 
instructed all of its diving supervisors to check all first stage regulators at the earliest opportunity to confirm that the relief 
valves have the correct components fitted, in accordance with suppliers’ specifications.  This check was to include both units 
in use and stored standby units. 

2  Loss of a Vessel 

2.1 

Introduction 

We  have  received  the  following  information  regarding  loss  of  a  survey  vessel.    This  loss  followed  the  ingress  of 
water into the ship’s engine room.  There were no injuries amongst the 29 crew members, who were safely carried 
to shore. 

1.22.2  Circumstances 

The company involved was contracted to conduct a seabed survey for a proposed pipeline and the vessel 
involved was tasked with carrying out the work scope.  

On  arrival  at  location  the  survey  operations  commenced  by  deployment  of  an  acoustic  transceiver  pole 
through the vessel’s hull via a gland, support stool and gate valve.  The system is located in the ship’s engine 
room. 

The  transceiver  pole  weighing  approximately  500 kg  and  5m  in  length  was  lowered  by  a  chain  block 
assembly.  At some point during the lowering and for reasons unknown, the pole fell freely some four to 
five  metres.    The  retaining  collar  and  supporting  steelwork  were  destroyed  by  the  inertial  energy  of  the 
pole thus the pole was lost to sea. 

 

Safety Flash 

Thereafter there was ingress of water into the engine room from the open gland.  The control wheel to 
the  gate  valve,  which  was  situated  at  the  base  of  the  support  stool  was  almost  immediately  submerged 
preventing access by staff to close it. 

The watertight doors to the port and starboard shaft tunnels were closed and the engine room evacuated.  
Distress calls were initiated, the company’s office advised and a nearby support vessel closed in to render 
assistance  and  to  receive  all  non-essential  personnel  off  the  vessel.    Assistance  was  also  obtained  from  a 
nearby coalition force vessel with helicopter support.  Once it was quickly established there was no risk to 
personnel efforts were focussed on saving the ship.  

Regrettably  only  one  of  three  pumps  landed  onboard  the  vessel  was  operable.    Given  this  situation  all 
remaining personnel were removed, thereafter the vessel remained afloat a further three hours, sinking in 
3,000 metres of water. 

Both  the  Master  and  his  team,  supported  by  the  various  vessels,  agencies  and  the  company  emergency 
response team, managed the whole nine hour incident in a controlled manner.  The entire crew of 29 were 
transferred by vessel’s rescue craft without injuries or incident of any kind. 

1.32.3  Follow Up 

The  company  involved,  together  with  regulatory  agencies,  is  continuing  to  investigate  the  incident.  
These investigations have, and will continue to be, focused on the cause and contingency systems.  

However, given the recent vessel losses and incidents within the both the deep seismic and high-resolution 
seismic industry the company involved believes the view that ‘it cannot happen to us’ must be challenged.  
The company involved has advised others to review their processes and the effects of their actions.  It is 
with this focus in mind and the best interests of the industry that the company involved has indicated that it 
will make available the regulatory findings and make recommendations to the classification society which, if 
implemented, should avoid such a repetition to other vessels. 

