AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 20/16 

Safety Flash 

 August 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary – Diving Incidents 

All  the  incidents  in  this  safety  flash  relate  to  diving.    The  first  and  second  incidents  cover  the  unplanned  or 
inappropriate release of divers’ helmets.  The third covers a differential pressure fatality.  The fourth relates to the 
failure of links which in turn led to the loss of lift bags.  The fifth, a near miss incident, relates to failure of umbilicals. 

1  Near Miss: Unintentional Release of Diving Helmet – Neck Dam/Helmet Securing Arrangements 

A member reported a near miss incident during diving operations in which the neck dam and helmet separated 
whilst the diver was wearing a Kirby Morgan 37.  The incident occurred in 9m water and there was minor water 
ingress  into  the  helmet.    The  diver  maintained  vertical  position, 
activated his free-flow and was recovered to the surface safely.  The 
hat  did  not  flood  and  communications  between  the  diver  and 
supervisor were maintained throughout.  On his safe arrival to the 
surface, he was examined immediately by the on board doctor and 
pronounced well. 

On notification of the incident, all diving activities were terminated 
and  a  full  incident  investigation  by  the  diving  contractor  and  the 
client  was  conducted.    All  personnel  were  brought  ashore  to  be 
interviewed  and  video  evidence  was  examined  from  both  deck 
cameras and the divers helmet camera. 

An investigation noted the following: 

 

Immediately after the incident the helmet was quarantined and 
inspected by qualified personnel; 

  The helmet appeared to have no defects, structural damage or other identifiable issues which may have caused 

or contributed to the separation; 

  Separation occurred via the mechanism designed for releasing the helmet from the neck dam; 

  The certification of this particular helmet was valid in accordance with company standards; 

  Pre-dive checks were logged and reported with video evidence available of them occurring; 

  The investigation team concluded with the information available to them that the  root cause of failure was 

human error.  It appears that the tender did not fit the hat correctly to the diver during pre-dive checks. 

The following lessons were learned: 

  Stress the importance of a well-defined and highly detailed pre-dive call out checklist; 

 
  Divers pre-water entry “call out” list to be repeated a second time and signed off by the diver’s tender and a 

competent second person; 

  Helmet lock pins should be fitted with approved Kirby Morgan sleeves as an additional control; 

  Duties and responsibilities for all personnel should be made clearly known by tool box talk on a “Dive by Dive” 
basis,  i.e.  each  person  is  to  know  his  exact  emergency  location  in  the  event  of  a  diving  related  in  water 
emergency; 

 

In this case, owing to the distance between the diving launch and recovery systems, a swim line was placed 
between the two to allow the emergency/standby diver easier and quicker access to any stricken diver; 

  Training around the risk of complacency should continue. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

IMCA SF 12/03 – Incident 1 – Near miss involving diver’s neck dam; 

IMCA SF 06/05 – Incident 3 – Near miss: flooding of a diver’s helmet; 

IMCA SF 06/07 – Incident 2 – Weld failure on Kirby Morgan KM17B 505-055 neck clamp; 

IMCA SF 02/11 – Incident 1 – Kirby Morgan SL 17C partially detached from neck dam; 

IMCA SF 15/13 – Incident 4 – Diving helmet: failure of sealed pull pin. 

 

 

 

 

 

2  Unintentional Release of Diving Helmet – Neck Dam/Helmet Securing Arrangements 

A member reported two incidents in which there has been unintentional release between neck ring and helmet on 
a  KM17C  diving  helmet  during  saturation  diving  operations.    Members  are  encouraged  to  ensure  that  diving 
personnel are aware and that they check the interface between helmet and its securing arrangement towards other 
equipment supporting the diver.  Working conditions could also give same results, e.g. working close to (taut) wires 
or large insertion bolts, etc. 

Our member identified the following corrective actions: 

  Verify that interface between helmet and other diving equipment is such that it cannot hook up the release 

mechanism; 

  Be aware of the potential of release such that operational measures could be taken to prevent this; 

  Report any further problems (with helmet and locking mechanisms) immediately. 

Incident details 

 

 
The manufacturer has developed a Pull Pin Sleeve which may also work to prevent this from recurring.  See the 
Kirby Morgan website for more details: www.kirbymorgan.com/support/bulletins/2012/bulletin-07-2012. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
A series of photographs follows for illustrative purposes: 

Kirby  Morgan  17C 
helmet 

Jump jacket 

Harness 

Hot water suit 

Pull  pins,  one  on 
either side of helmet 

Pin  shown  in  closed 
position 

Jump jacket 

Figure 1: Divers Equipment interfacing with harness and jump jacket 

 

Figure 2: Kirby Morgan 17C Divers Helmet with Jewel 601 Reclaim Hat 

 

 

Clash between diver helmet Pull Pin and jump jacket 

 

Helmet/Neck Ring Pull Pin securing mechanism 

Pull Pin shown in closed position 

Pull Pin shown in open position 

 

 

Evaluation of the bale-out system 

Position of Helmet/Neck Ring Pull Pins in relation 
to divers harness with head in normal upright 
position 

Position of Helmet/Neck Ring Pull Pins in 
relation to divers harness with head bent 
forward looking down 

 

 

 

 

Position of Helmet/Neck ring Pull 
Pin in relation with Bailout/Jump 
jacket equipment with head bent 

forward looking down 

 

3 

Fatal Diver Incident Due to Uncontrolled Differential Pressure 

The International Association of Oil and gas Producers (IOGP) has published the following safety alert regarding a 
diving fatality which was caused by uncontrolled differential pressure.  The incident occurred when the diver was 
preparing to blind off the torpedo pipe on the rig's pontoon.  The torpedo pipe is a 0.45m diameter pipe running 
through the pontoon of the rig to allow for wires used when thrusters are to be replaced.  The length of this pipe 
was 13m, with one lower valve 1m up from the bottom, and one upper valve 1.2 m from the top of the pipe.  The 
valves were partly open to equalise the pipe. 

A safety meeting had been conducted before work started, and this pipe was the seventh to be worked on.  The 
diving was carried out following the NORSOK U-103 standard for inshore diving. 

What Went Wrong? 

When the diver introduced air into the pipe an artificial, 
undiscovered  concrete  plug  on  top  of  the  upper  valve 
broke and the divers head and left arm were sucked into 
the  pipe  causing  great  pain.    The  standby  diver,  being 
fully dressed, entered the water immediately (within 30 
seconds)  and  the  wounded  diver  was  brought  to  the 
surface  within 9 minutes.   At the time  he  had stopped 
breathing,  but  his  breathing  and  pulse  were  regained 
through CPR.  The diver was sent to hospital where he 
died two days later. 

This  fatal  diving  incident  was  due  to  uncontrolled 
differential pressure. 

IOGP Safety Alert number 275 can be seen here. 

Members  may  wish  to  review  the  following  similar 
incidents (search words: differential, pressure): 

 

 

IMCA  SF  14/11  –  Incident  2  –  Identification  of 
differential 
diving 
operations; 

pressures 

subsea 

during 

IMCA  SF  06/14  –  Incident  1  –  Fatality  during  air 
diving operations. 

 
The following information will also be of use and interest: 

  Association  of  Diving  Contractors  International  (ADCI)  video  on  the  dangers  of  differential  pressure: 

http://videos.adc-int.org/dangers-of-delta-p; 

  UK Health & Safety Executive (UKHSE) Diving Information: Sheet No 13 Differential pressure hazards in diving; 

  UKHSE research report: RR761 Differential pressure hazards in diving. 

4 

Loss of 3 Tonne Lift Bags Owing to Equipment Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which links failed on a number of 3 tonne (closed, salvage type) lift bags.  The 
incident occurred when the diver was filling lift bags during a saturation dive. 

Diver 1 filled lift bag No. 2 and disconnected the air hose once the bag was fully inflated to prepare to move to the 
next lift bag, No.4.  At this moment the No. 2 lift bag broke away from the connecting shackle on the webbing strap 
installed on the pipe-line.  The event was clearly observed by both the diver and the Diving Supervisor.  Diver 1 then 
also noticed that Lift Bag No. 3 was also missing.  In the position where Lift bag No. 2 had been installed, the diver 
recovered the triangular lifting link which had failed.  The link was recovered to the surface for inspection. 

The  vessel  Master  had  observed  the  lift  bag  coming  to  the  surface  close  to  the  air  dive  station  and  informed 
Saturation Dive Control that the starboard azimuth thruster had been stopped in order to prevent the bag from 
entering.  The bag had drifted with the current towards the stern of the vessel and then disappeared from view.  
Dive Control were informed of the degraded status caused by the intentional stopping of one of the thrusters and 
the decision was taken to abort the dive.  The divers were safely recovered to the bell. 

Our member notes the following: 

  The primary cause of the incident was the failure of the stainless steel lifting link; 

  Had  the  diver  or  his  umbilical  not  been  clear,  the  results  of  the  failure  of  the  lifting  link  would  have  been 

 

It appears that this was caused by the failure of the material (stainless steel) of which the lifting link was made; 

  The lift bags were new and each bag had a certificate; 

  The safety factor recorded in the certificate is 6 times the normal operating load, i.e. 3 tonnes SWL with a safety 

  Metallurgical analysis of the failed ring was conducted, and it was discovered that: 

tests show it starting to fail at 10KN = 1 tonne – rather than 18 tonnes (3 tonnes SWL with a safety factor 
of 6) as in the certificate 

the rings were bent and welded during production, which compromises strength significantly; 

  The  conclusion  reached  by  our  member  is  that  the  supplied  lift  bag  certificates  were  counterfeit  and  the 

equipment supplied was incorrectly designed. 

catastrophic; 

factor of 6; 

 

 

Prevention: 

  After careful examination of the failed material, it was decided to condemn all of the remaining 3 tonne bags 
and before recovery of the remaining bags on the pipe-line, the ROV was used to puncture the bags so that 
divers could safely recover the deflated bags; 

 
The broken lifting link is shown in the accompanying photos together with a link from another bag for comparison. 

 

 

 

 

Important Note:  The lift bags involved in this incident were not designed or manufactured by an IMCA member 
company. 

IMCA members have recorded a number of incidents of unplanned release of lift bags to the surface but in all cases 
the  cause  was  human  error  rather  than  equipment  failure.    Failure  of  lifting  equipment,  whether  subsea  or 
otherwise, through corrosion or other metallurgical issue is something that also arises from time to time. 

5  Near Miss: Divers’ Umbilical Rupture During Routine Maintenance 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which a divers’ umbilical ruptured.  A dive system technician was 
doing routine pressure testing (following company planned maintenance schedules) on one of the divers’ umbilical.  
As the umbilical was being brought up to testing pressure, the distinct sound of an air leak was heard.  The dive 
technician stopped further pressurization and went to investigate the air leak. 

Before the final test pressure could be reached the umbilical breathing hose ruptured at about 14 Bar pressure. 

 

 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  There was damage to the outer coating of the divers breathing hose at the area of the leak; 

  The actual hose had some mechanical damage that may have contributed to the cause of the burst during the 

pressure test; 

  The damage on the breathing hose was 80m from the diver’s end.  Since the damage was found 80 meters from 

the diver’s end, the damage is likely to have occurred somewhere on the diving platform; 

  The outer coating of the pneumo hose was damaged at the same location; 

  The umbilical was part of a diving system that had just returned from a project and was undergoing a pressure 

test as per company procedures. 

Our member noted that pressure testing should be carried out in a clearly marked designated area, and that all 
nearby personnel should to be informed when a pressure test is to be carried out.  Personnel conducting the test 
should be using the correct personal protective equipment (PPE).  There should be close visual inspection of the 
umbilical for surface damage before the pressure testing starts – if any area is found to be damaged, the adjacent 
area should be cordoned off whilst pressure testing. 

Our member reiterated the importance of safe umbilical handling and making efforts to keep the divers’ umbilical 
safe from any damage even on the diving platform at all times. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: umbilical): 

 

IMCA SF 05/16 – Incident 2 – Near miss: fouled diver umbilical. 

