AB 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/12 

Safety Flash 

  July 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1  Near Miss: Dropped Objects 

A member has reported an incident on an offshore platform in which three scaffold boards fell 4m from one deck to another. 
The  incident  occurred  when  the  scaffold  boards  were  being  lowered  in  vertical  bundles  of  three  boards  through  a  hatch 
opening on the cellar deck.  The crew were using a timber hitch and a half hitch on a 19mm hemp rope fed through a shackle 
attached  to  a  beam  clamp.  Whilst  lifting  the  bundle  of  three  boards  over  the  handrail  of  the  hatch,  the  knot  holding  the 
boards together contacted the handrail, causing it to loosen. This resulted in the three boards falling to the temporary deck 
(+24m level) four metres below. One of the boards then ricocheted off and fell a further 15 metres, landing in an area where 
two painters were working. The scaffold plank grazed one of the painters on the arm before coming to rest. The painter was 
assessed by the medic, but no treatment was required. 

 

 

 

View through Cellar Deck Opening to +24m landing 

 

 

View from Sub Cellar deck +24 m level 

 

An investigation revealed the following: 

♦  Work preparation and risk assessment was not adequate – the HIRA controls had been ‘ticked off’ and yet not followed, 

and the work method was inappropriate for the volume of scaffolding being moved; 

♦ 

Improper rigging practices were used – the rope was rigged over a shackle rather than using a gin wheel; 

♦  Three boards were being lowered at once – industry practice is for two boards at once as a maximum. 

♦  Local scaffolding  guidelines were updated to reflect industry practice of no more than  two boards to be lowered at a 

The following lessons and actions were identified: 

time; 

♦  Dropped object zones need to account for potential deflection. 

2  Near Miss: Bell Umbilical Damage Incident 

A member has reported an incident in which a diving bell umbilical was damaged after it was trapped between the cursor and 
the  bell.  After  completion  of  diving  operations  a  deck  foreman  was  in  the  vessel  bell  garage  assisting  with  bell  recovery 
operations. He noticed that the white tape mark on the bell umbilical and the white tape mark on the cursor wire were not 
aligned as the curser started to rise. He called an ‘all stop’ and the situation was investigated. 

It  was  found  that  the umbilical  was  snagged  under  the  upper  guide  wire  slot  on  the  cursor  and  was  trapped  between  the 
cursor and the bell. The deck foreman advised the dive supervisor who lowered the bell back to 30m of sea water, in order 
to investigate the problem further. The umbilical was freed by slackening it and slowly raising the bell on the main winch. A 
Remote Operated Vehicle (ROV) was used to check the condition of the bell umbilical. 

A  slight  leak  was  detected  from  damage  observed  to  the  umbilical  outer  sheath  and  a  small  amount  of  gas  could  be  seen 
coming from one of the small pneumo-fathometer hoses. The divers secured the pneumo valves and the leak was stopped. 
The bell left 30m and internal pressure was maintained. The bell arrived on surface and was locked onto the system. All of 
the bell internal valves were closed and the system was bled down and the bell prepared for surfacing and sealed. All valves 
were secured inside the bell and the bell was recovered with the correct amount of tension on the umbilical for immediate 
transfer of the divers and assessment of the damage in the dry. There was no loss of integrity to the bell and the divers inside 
were unharmed.   

 

 

View from ROV showing damaged umbilical leaking gas 

 

During an investigation the following points were noted: 

♦  The immediate cause of the incident was found to be that the dive supervisor did not ensure sufficient tension on the 

bell umbilical to eliminate the risk of it bunching, trapping and being damaged during bell recovery operations; 

♦  Underlying causes identified were as follows: 

– 

– 

loss  of  control:  the  dive  supervisor  lost  concentration  when  distracted  during  the  aft  bell  recovery 
operations/activities.  Existing  procedural  and  engineering  control  measures  which  might  have  prevented  this  were 
not effectively applied 
design: the differential read-out monitor alarm indicator is a visual alarm only, and not audible also, which could go 
unnoticed; 

♦ 

It  was  unclear  whether  or  not  the  dive  supervisor  had  noticed  the  visual  alarm  (red  flashing  bell  in  the  screen  of  the 
differential read-out monitor) which highlights the differential selected for each dive undertaken; 

♦  The  dive  supervisor  was  a  very  experienced  member  of  the  dive  team,  with  great  experience  in  using  on-board  bell 
launch and recovery systems, and had performed bell deployment and recovery operations numerous times in the past. 
On  this  occasion  the  dive  supervisor  believes  he  had  become  distracted  and  had  not  paid  attention  to  the  length  of 
umbilical paid out prior to recovery; 

♦  Experience and competence in tasks does not mean that the risks of being distracted, or losing focus, does not remain 

high when undertaking what may be considered “routine” tasks; 

The following corrective and preventative actions were taken: 

♦  Re-termination of umbilical; 

♦ 

Installation  of  an  audible  alarm  onto  the  differential  panel  read-out  on  the  hydraulic  control  panel,  which  will  enhance 
pre-existing warning controls of differentials when recovering dive bells; 

♦  Bell launch/recovery risk assessments reviewed and updated with incident findings and addition hazard control measures. 

 

 

3  Near Miss: Failure of Load During Lifting  

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following Safety Flash regarding a near miss incident in which a 20 tonne 
subsurface buoy split in two and fell 30cm back onto the trailer from which it was being lifted. There were no injuries or 
damage to the trailer. The only equipment damaged in the incident was the buoyancy itself. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.28.pdf 

4  Platform Supply Vessel comes into Contact with Fixed Platform 

The MSF has published the following Safety Flash regarding an incident in which a platform supply vessel came into contact 
with  the  leg  of  a  fixed  platform,  causing  some  slight  damage  to  the  leg.  The  immediate  cause  was  found  to  be  mechanical 
failure of a relay in the engine control system. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.29.pdf 

