SAFETY FLASH 

 April 2019 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/19 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Latent Trip Hazards 

What happened? 

A member reports several trip hazards in vessel machinery spaces.  On one occasion, a crew member entered the 
emergency generator room, stepped on an exposed support gusset, and twisted 
their left foot and ankle resulting in a lost time injury (LTI).  On another occasion, 
a crew member on routine watch keeping duty tripped on an uneven surface in 
the  upper  bow  thruster  room,  causing  a  medical  treatment  case  (to  the 
shoulder). 

What were the causes? 

Investigations confirmed that  depending on the  age and design of the vessel, 
many  latent  hazards  have  been  present,  usually  from  design/construction,  or 
because of engineering changes during the life of the vessel.  Much of the time, 
these hazards remain latent and do not result in injury. 

Uneven surfaces were the cause of both incidents.  One was due to a redundant 
support  gusset  located  on  top  of  a  step  and  the  other  because  of  multiple 
uneven walkways. 

What lessons were learned? 

Latent hazards can be eliminated by:  

 

Including human factors in the design of vessels; 

  Eliminating uneven surfaces; 

  Applying management of change (MoC) to any engineering design changes 

and when not possible to eliminate, use of signage (‘tiger tape’) to identify uneven surfaces; 

 

In  addition,  keeping  all  access  ways clear,  use  of  non-skid  paint,  keep  surfaces  clean  of  grease/dirt, ensure 
lighting is adequate and wear appropriate footwear and personal protective equipment (PPE) that is in good 
condition and fastened properly. 

What actions were taken?  

A  fleet  wide  latent  hazard  hunt  was  conducted,  focussed  on  all  lessons  learned.    Many  similar  hazards  were 
identified and rectified immediately and/or included in maintenance schedules including an MoC process. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

 LTI: engineer injured following engine room slip/trip 

2  Near Miss: Crewman Struck on Head by Crane Hook (Marine Safety Forum) 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published Safety Alert 18-26, in which an AB was struck on the head by a crane 
hook during routine deck cargo transfer operations.  

A platform supply vessel (PSV) was carrying out the routine deck cargo operations at an offshore installation.  Two 
crew on deck were routinely hooking on and off cargo as it was being discharged and back loaded to and from the 
vessel.  Shift change was due, so after discharge of the cargo carrying unit (CCU), the crew moved to the forward 
end of the cargo deck for shift change.  However, before departing from deck, there was no routine check of the 
next CCU to ensure it was ready for discharge; this critical step was overlooked.  

The crane was landing the previous CCU on the installation deck whilst the crew completed their handover on the 
PSV’s deck.  The oncoming crew were waiting in the ‘safe area’ for the crane hook to return to vessel in order to 
attach the next CCU.  As the crane hook was being lowered, the new crew noticed that the lifting bridle was snagged; 
their attention was immediately drawn away from the approaching crane hook as they freed the lifting bridle.  This 
took only a matter of seconds; they then stood back to look up for the crane hook, which had continued its descent 
to the deck unchecked by the crane operator.  

As one of the crew looked up at the crane hook, it struck his hard hat before continuing its descent to the vessel 
deck.  Luckily, his hard hat did the job and he was uninjured.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

Several critical factors were identified from this incident: 

  There was a shift change as soon as the previous CCU had been discharged;  

  Neither shift ensured that the lifting bridle on the next CCU was clear and ready to hook; 

  When  the  new  crew  noticed  the  lifting  bridle  had  snagged,  their  attention  was  drawn  away  from  the 

approaching crane hook;  

  Crew did not contact the crane operator to advise him to stop lowering the crane hook whilst they handled the 

snagged lifting bridle, therefore the crane operator did not realise that their attention was elsewhere. 

The root cause was deemed to be failure to follow established routine and best practice procedures: 

  There was a breakdown in communication between the crew and the crane operator; the crane operator should 

have been advised by radio and/or hand signals to stop lowering the crane hook;  

  Crew should use available time when the previous CCU is discharged to inspect the next CCU and ensure that 

it is ready for hooking onto the crane hook when lowered; 

 

If extra time is needed for shift change, ‘stop the job’ and take the required time for handover. 

What actions were taken? 

 

Investigation  found  that  neither  the  vessel  operators’  nor  the  crane  operators’  procedures  provided  clear, 
detailed  guidance on  how cargo  transfer operations should  be  conducted.    Both  parties  were  requested to 
review and update their procedures; 

  The client imposed step-by-step instructions to be followed by all involved in cargo transfer operations, in order 

to allow the operators time to update their procedures accordingly.  

The full safety alert can be found on the MSF website.  

3  Personal Injury Following PPE Violation and Slip and Fall on Deck  

What happened? 

A vessel Master was injured when he went to the main deck to perform routine checks 
without safety footwear or a safety helmet.   While walking on the wet main deck, he 
slipped  and  fell,  sustaining  an  injury  on  his  head.    Following  first  aid  administered 
onboard, he was taken to a local hospital for investigation, and it was confirmed there 
were no other consequences other than abrasions on the affected area.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

This alert emphasises the following: 

 

Leading by (bad) example – all of us should be role models for a good safety culture, but most especially those 
in leadership positions; 

  The importance of PPE compliance – neglecting the use of personal protective equipment is not only a breach 

of the PPE procedure, but also a disregard for your own person; 

  Acceptance of unsafe behaviour – all should be empowered and expected to exercise the ‘stop work policy’; 

  A personal decision was made to cut corners – this incident is evidence that shortcuts very rarely save time or 
energy; the ‘shortcut’ in this case actually cost his colleagues and the company a lot of unplanned time and 
effort to take proper care of his injury. 

What actions were taken? 

  Formal warning issued given the deliberate violation of a safety procedure.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

  How PPE works: fire and thermal protection 

 

 

LTI: Engineer Injured Following Engine Room Slip/Trip 

LTI – person slipped on the stairs and broke his arm 

4  Hand Injury During Closing of Hatch 

What happened? 

Four crewmen made a journey by small boat to inspect an SPM 
and  floating  hoses.    After  completion  of  the  inspection  and 
maintenance work, two of them were closing the SPM hatch, but 
were informed by the control room that the door was not sealing 
properly.  The hatch was repeatedly opened and closed without 
achieving the required seal.  On further inspection, it was noticed 
that a hatch locking part was misaligned.  This was corrected, and 
the  hatch  was  closed.    The  moment  the  hatch  stopper  was 
removed,  the  hatch  door  swung  inside  towards  one  of  the 
workers, and as he tried to move away from the path of the hatch 
he  slipped,  causing  his  left  thumb  to  be  pinched  between  the 
hatch and bulkhead. 

The injured person was taken ashore for treatment.  There were contusions and a minor fracture.  Following medical 
treatment, the injured person was declared by a doctor to be fit to return to light duties.  

What were the causes? 

  The worker slipped on a slippery/wet uneven surface; 

  The hatch would not lock properly because the locking mechanism was mis aligned; 

  Hatch door on the SPM was not secured by rope in the open position. 

What actions were taken? 

  Added names of local land hospital on Emergency Response Plan and list of Emergency Contacts; 

  Means to secure the hatch when open were added to the Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment Register. 

A  provisions  lift  onboard  a  vessel  became  stuck.    The  chief  engineer  was  called  to  attempt  a  repair.    During 
assessment of the problem, the lift dropped whilst his head was in its path, causing a serious head injury resulting 
in an LTI.  He made a full recovery.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Finger Injury: Pinch Point 

 

Injury – failure of hatch holdback arrangements 

  Finger Injury: Diver caught finger in bell door 

5 

LTI: Head Injury 

What happened? 

What went wrong? 

The vessel provisions lift was loaded with items to be stored 
onboard  when  one  of  the  crew  identified  that  the  lift  had 
become stuck.  This was due to packaging from some of the 
food items fouling the lift shaft.  The chief engineer asked for 
the  pry  bar  to  see  if  he  could  clear  it.    He  then  struck  the 
jammed object (food packaging) with the pry bar and at this 
point  the elevator dropped  suddenly  to the main deck.  The 
crew member was struck in the back of his head by the front 
horizontal cabinet bar after it had dropped from the jammed 
position.  It is estimated that the elevator cabinet fell about 
15-20 cm before it made contact with his head.   

The provisions elevator dropped in an uncontrolled manner; 

  The elevator lifting chains were in a slack position and not 
supporting the weight of the elevator cabinet due to the 
packaging being stuck.  When the food packaging jam was 
removed, it allowed the provision elevator to drop in an uncontrolled manner; 

  The Chief Engineers body position was in the line of fire.  When using the crow bar, he lent forward, and his 

head was then inside the elevator cabinet. 

What were the causes? 

Our members’ findings were: 

  Manufacturers’ quality control – deficiencies in the quality control and document control process; 

  Oversight during commissioning – inadequate oversight during commissioning; 

  There was inadequate risk perception: formal work planning tools were not in place (permit to work (PTW), risk 

assessment). 

What actions were taken? 

manufacturer;  

  Provisions  elevator  removed  from  service  until  issues  identified  have  been  addressed  and  repaired  by 

  New risk assessment developed to cover any work required on the elevator; 

  Vessel training sessions developed and will be conducted with onboard management.  Onboard management 
will then present these topics (i.e. risk management process, life-saving rules, to their teams at safety meetings. 

What lessons were learned? 

  The incident may have been avoided had the formal work planning tools (i.e. PTW, risk assessment, tool box 

talk (TBT)) been in use when the problem with the jammed provision elevator occurred; 

 

It was also identified after further investigation that the manufacturer’s approved electrical drawings had a 
design flaw allowing some safety interlocks to be electrically bypassed.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Stored Pressure Release – Crewman lost an eye 

  Fatality During Maintenance of Elevator Lift (2001) 

