AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/99 

Safety Flash 

August 1999 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Transponder Explosion 

We have received a report of an incident on one of our members’ vessels where a Simrad SHT SPT 319 transponder was 
retrieved from the seabed.  Once on deck and during the opening procedure of the housing, to enable the batteries to be 
checked, there was a build-up of internal pressure.  This caused an explosion of the internal casing resulting in flying debris 
and the subsequent formation and release of possibly toxic gases.  Fortunately no-one was injured in this incident. 

The contractor involved has advised its personnel to treat all transponders with care and if there is any doubt about any unit 
it  should  be  put  in  safe  quarantine  until  expert  help  is  arranged.    They  advise  that  Simrad’s  operations  manual  should  be 
referenced for safety guidelines. 

2  Lifeboat Drop Test 

One of our members has recently experienced an incident during a lifeboat drop test carried out on three lifeboats.  One of 
the three lifeboats failed its drop test due to the rear door opening after entering the water. 

The  lifeboat  was  loaded  to  110%  load  (achieved  with  water  bags)  and  included  three  personnel.    The  boat  was  fully 
submerged underwater during its dive and projection away from the platform.  After surfacing it was clear that there had 
been  water  ingress  to  the  boat.    Fortunately  there  was  no  injury  to  the  personnel  in  the  boat.    The  on-site  supplier 
representative performed adjustments to the door latches in order to increase latch tightness and the boat eventually passed 
the test after two more drops. 

The member has informed us that the supplier was Norsafe AS, Faervik, Norway, who have confirmed to them that they 
have  no  previous  experience  of  doors  opening  during  this  type  of  operation.    The  supplier  is  currently  carrying  out  an 
investigation to determine the cause of the incident. 

