Safety Flash 

May 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

This safety flash consists of incidents having a number of unrelated themes. 

1  More than a Dropped Object – the Need for Vigilance During Cargo Operations 

UK Step Change in Safety has published a ‘Safety Moment’ describing an incident in which a car travelling along a 
road near a port was struck by an object.  It is thought that the object was left on top of a container that came back 
from offshore and was being transported on a lorry travelling in the opposite direction. 

The object weighed 15kg and came through the windscreen of the car, narrowly missing the driver - a mother - and 
her child.  This incident could easily have been very much more serious. 

 

Step Change notes the following causes of dropped and potential dropped objects: 

  Objects left unintentionally and not found before transportation; 

  Unsecured items missed during pre-lift checks; 

 

Items detaching as a result of colliding with other cargo or vessel/lorry. 

Step Change suggests the following helpful advice: 

  Pre-transportation checks must be undertaken and given high importance; 

  People responsible for loading and transportation must be observant and ensure loads are secure; 

 

 

 
  Everyone must remain in a safe area, clear of lifts until the cargo is landed; 

  All dropped and potential dropped objects must be reported to the installation and vessel owner. 

Please circulate widely the ‘Safety Moment’ PPT presentation developed by Step Change describing this incident, 
which can be found here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search words: cargo, object): 

 

IMCA SF 19/14 – Incident 3 – Near miss: dropped object from cargo. 

2  Unsecured Cargo Inside Containers 

Incident 1 

Two incidents are highlighted here in which cargo was damaged because it was not properly secured. 

A member has reported an incident in which cargo weighing 1.5 tonnes was damaged during transportation when 
it was returned to the supplier by road.  The cargo was placed unsecured within a half-height container and was 
allowed to move freely.  Whilst the damage was minor, the incident highlighted several very serious issues that 
posed a risk to the truck driver, the truck, as well as other road vehicles and pedestrians.  

  The truck could have become unstable due to the shifting load affecting handling and braking; 

  This situation could have caused damage to the strops used to secure the half height container to the truck 

leading to a lost load. 

A finding in this case was that there had been a breakdown in communication between the lifting crew, a third-
party technician and the truck driver, which led to a failure to secure the load within the container. 

  Ensure that any cargo or equipment is confirmed to be adequately secured for transfer before it is lifted; 

  Ensure good communication between those responsible for the cargo, lifting teams, and transportation teams 

  Ensure that it is clearly understood who has responsibility for confirming the security of equipment when it is 

ashore; 

lifted in containers. 

Incident 2  

Step Change UK reports an incident in which an unsecured motor 
in a cargo carrying unit (CCU) fell to deck as it was being secured.  
No-one  was  harmed  but  the  motor,  which  weighed  95kg,  was 
extensively damaged. 

When opened, a  CCU was found to be  a shelved unit containing 
two  palletised  blower  motors  each  weighing  95kg  –  one  on  the 
lower level and the other on the shelf.  It was intended to remove 
only  the  lower  motor  and  send  the  second  (upper)  motor  back 
onshore for reloading.  The upper motor was not secure and moves 
were made to secure it before back loading.  As crew climbed onto 
the  shelf  in  attempts  to  secure  the  motor,  its  pallet  shifted  and 
tipped forward.  The motor fell from height onto the deck, causing 
extensive  damage  to  the motor.    No one  was  injured  during  the 
incident, but had there been crew in the way, this could have resulted in serious personal injury.  See the full alert 
here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: cargo, unsecured): 

 

IMCA SF 17/09 – Incident 2 – Loading and securing of containers; 

 

 
 

IMCA SF 10/13 – Incident 2 – Loading and securing of cargo. 

3  Damage to Rescue Boat During Lowering 

A member has reported an incident in which a rescue boat (FRC) was damaged as a result of it being lowered in its 
davit during a scheduled drill.  During the process of being swung out, the FRC experienced a load imbalance causing 
it to list heavily on its starboard side.  This resulted in the starboard load bearing rod being dislodged from the boat 
foundation, which in turn meant that the boat could not be lifted back up using its single arm davit.  No personnel 
were in the boat so there were no injuries – but the FRC was damaged. 

FRC listed to starboard, showing canopy parted 

Showing failed starboard load bearing member 

 

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  Following the Masters instructions, crew proceeded to lower the boat up to water level; 

  The boat was swung out on the davit without removing the shipside securing chain before launching; 

  The crew continued to hoist the boat with the help of motor; the boat started tilting to port side, until the 

whole load of the boat came onto the starboard side supporting rod; 

  Structural integrity of the boat: pictures taken during drill reveal that the engine door was not in place on the 

canopy before lowering.  It is important to ensure the structural integrity of the boat before launch; 

  Due to more load on the base of the starboard side supporting rod, the boat top canopy sheared off from the 

foundation.  At that point, the Master suspended the operation. 

The following lessons were learned: 

particularly launch and recovery; 

  More effective command and control should be exercised by vessel management during small boat operations, 

  Careful  checks  should  be  carried  out  by  designated  personnel  before  lowering  the  boat,  to  ensure  that 

everything is properly prepared and ready; 

  The vessel management and crew resourcefully managed to recover the damaged boat using the provisions 
crane, but there was no proper Management of Change (MoC) procedure initiated, leading to the potential for 
a second, possibly more serious incident; 

  Thorough  review  to  take  place  of  company  procedures  and  training  for  small  boat  operations,  including 

preparation of video and photographic training material. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: boat, davit): 

IMCA SF 10-11 – Incident 2 – Lifeboat drill – near casualty; 

IMCA SF 09-12 – Incident 1 – Inadvertent lowering of lifeboat. 

 

 

 

 
4  Near Miss: Incorrect Rigging of Life Raft Hydrostatic Release 

IMCA’s attention has been drawn to a near miss in which it was found 
that the hydrostatic release on a life raft was not correctly rigged.  This 
was discovered following the replacement of a life raft.  It was noticed 
that if the collar on the Senhouse slip was lifted for life raft launch, it 
would  not  release  the  strap  as  the  lashing  that  connected  it  to  the 
hydrostatic release unit was tied too tightly, so the arm would not easily 
slip through and release.  This was due to the hitches in the lashing being 
carried on too far up towards the slip, not leaving enough room for the 
arm of the slip to move sufficiently. 

The following points are to be noted: 

  The  Senhouse  slip  should  not  be  attached  through  a  lashing  and 

should be directly attached to the hydrostatic release unit; 

  Hydrostatic release units  are  fitted with a yellow  plastic that aids 
the release of the Senhouse slip when released.  If fitted through a 
lashing,  this  can  create  friction  making  the  operator  unable  to 
launch the life raft safely; 

  The lashing can still be used in the securing of the life raft, but in a 

different  position.    Care  should be  taken to ensure that  the painter line  is  tied through the red ring on the 
Hydrostatic release unit. 

 

 

Further information on correct securing of life rafts can be found in the UK Marine & Coastguard Agency (MCA) 
Marine Guidance Note 343.  

Lashing tied too tight where usually 

connected to Senhouse slip 

Correctly stowed HRU on life raft 

Incorrectly rigged HRU. 

 

 

 

 
5 

Line Parting as a Result of Socket Failure During Grapnel Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a line parted during grapnel operations.  The incident occurred as 
grapnels were being recovered during attempts to snag, capture and recover a cable on the seabed. 

The end of the rope pulled out of its socket, releasing the rope down the aft deck and overboard.  A bar at the stern 
was damaged and a camera and floodlight were carried overboard. 

Parted rope on deck 

Resulting damage to Atlantic bar 

 

 

Our member noted the following: 

was observed to be 175kN; 

  Higher than expected tensions were experienced during the recovery.  At the time of the incident rope tension 

  During watch handover, the situation regarding high tensions (averaging 130-140kN) was properly explained; 

  The aft deck and “Snap Back Zones” were kept clear as per normal practice; 

  The “Atlantic bar” was in place on the stern sheave;   

  All ropes had been inspected (as per toolbox talks conducted and recorded) during pay-out and recovery, and 

there was no sign of excessive degradation to the failed rope or fitting prior to the incident; 

  The  recovery  of  the  grapnels  at  higher  than  expected  tensions,  handover  and  safety  briefing  in  unusual 

operation conditions, and back deck/snap-back zone safety were all handled diligently and professionally; 

 

 

  The rope failed at less than the minimum breaking load (MBL) of the rope, which was 25.0 tonnes: 

tensions of up to 200kN (app. 20 tonnes) had been experienced during the recovery 

the working load limit (WLL) of the rope would have been 12.5 tonnes (app. 125kN) which was adequate 
for the expected tensions (app. 100-120kN / 10-12 tonnes); 

 

It is possible that the rope socket had gradually degraded over the previous 10 grapnel drives, but with no 
obvious visual signs of having done so. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

IMCA  SF  06/13  –  Incident  2  –  Loss  of  ROV  after  umbilical  termination  failure  and  damage  to  ROV  during 
recovery. 

 

LTI: Contact with Refrigerant Gas Causing Hand Injury  

 
6 

What happened?  

An  engineer  suffered  a  freezing  burn  to  his  hand  when  there  was  a  leak  of 
refrigerant  gas  while  he  was  refilling  a  vessel’s  central  air  conditioning  (AC) 
system.    When  the  job  was  completed,  the  engineer  closed  the  proper valves, 
disconnected the refrigerant gas bottle, and started the motor to check for any 
leaks in the system.  The AC system was up and running at that time.   

But  the engineer decided –  with the  AC compressor running  –  to  give one  last 
torque to the valve to once more ensure it was properly torqued.  He crouched 
and placed himself in front of the point of connection to the hose – “in the line of 
fire”.  Unfortunately, he inadvertently opened the valve instead of tightening it 
further.  It is considered likely that the pin of the ratchet wrench had moved to 
the opposite position and the engineer did not check the direction of the torque.   

There was an immediate refrigerant gas leak towards him.  He put his left hand 
on the leak and tried unsuccessfully to close the valve with the ratchet wrench 
with  his  right  hand.    At  that  moment,  a  colleague  pushed  the  engineer  out  of 
danger and was able to close the valve in a safe manner. 

The engineer’s gloves were initially frozen on; once they were off, his hands were 
placed in running water.  He suffered severe second degree freezing burns to both 
hands.  He was treated on board with the telephone guidance of a doctor, and 
subsequently transferred ashore for hospital treatment.  

It was noted that the client was not made aware of the incident by the contractor 
until  the  following  morning,  and  therefore  the  client  (operators)  emergency 
response organization was not notified nor mobilized.  The on-board vessel crew 
did  not  immediately  realize  the  severity  of  the  injury  and  therefore  did  not 
communicate it immediately to the client. 

What were the causes of the incident? 

Refrigerant gas Freon™ 404A reaches temperatures of around -46°C when it is released (i.e. decompressed). 

 

Lack of risk assessment and proper preparation: 
 

there was no proper risk assessment nor job safety analysis (JSA) conducted for the task 

there was no awareness of the dangers involved 

there was no knowledge of the MSDS for this refrigerant gas; 

the point from which the leak occurred pointed towards the operator 

the engineer placed himself “in the line of fire” in front of the point of connection to the hose 

there was improper intervention on ‘live’ equipment without proper safety precautions; 

the engineer did not check the torque direction of ratchet wrench before use, therefore he torqued the 
valve in the wrong direction; 

  Personal protective equipment (PPE) 

the engineer was wearing fabric gloves instead of proper thermal protection gloves as recommended in the 
MSDS 

thermal protection gloves were not available on board nor had the need for them occurred to the company. 

 

Line of fire: 
 

  Procedures: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Consequences 

Actions: 

  Eleven days in hospital including intravenous medication and surgery to the burnt hands; 

  Following discharge from hospital, a further month of physiotherapy before the injured person was fit for work. 

  Proper training in job risk analysis, risk assessment and “line of fire” for crews; 

  Permit to work (PTW) to become mandatory for work on high pressure equipment; 

  Rotate the position of the discharge point of the compressor so as not to point towards workers, and addition 

of safety/retention valve (Schrader type valves) on compressor discharge lines; 

  Provision of proper and specific thermal protection gloves; 

  Reassessment of chemicals used on board and their MSDS; 

  Ensure that client/operator is informed of any and all injuries on board contractor vessels on hire as soon as 

possible. 

 

