AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/15 

Safety Flash 

  June 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1 

“Routine” Task, Non-Routine Result: Batteries Stored Sideways Leak Battery Acid 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which there was a spill of battery acid.  An electrician had charged the wet cell 
batteries  of  two  motion  reference  units  (MRU),  each  contained  in  a  plastic  box.    Once  the  charging  was  completed,  the 
electrician closed the boxes and had to place them on the floor to wait for the next shift to test the equipment.  

However, to limit the amount of floor space for storage the electrician placed the boxes on their sides, neglecting to remember 
that this improper orientation (batteries on their side) could allow the wet cell batteries to leak acid.   

Crew  on  the  following  shift  opened  one  case  and  noticed  a  smell,  suggesting  battery  acid.    Upon  further  inspection,  the 
electricians noticed that battery acid had run out of the vents of the batteries in both plastic containers.  

Had the circumstances been different, this could have been a very serious incident.  

Figures above: No labelling on container indicating proper storage instruction or hazards of contents 

 

 

 

Figure: Location of vents permitting acid to leak out of battery 

Figure: Extent of acid spill 

when improperly stored 

 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

  A wet cell battery with vents would permit leakage of the battery if stored improperly; 

  The containers were stored on their sides; the electrician forgot that in doing this, the batteries might leak; 

 

  The battery containers were not labelled to provide information regarding: 

  Which way up they should be stored 

  What was inside – the possible hazards of wet cell batteries.  

The lessons were: 

  Boxes and containers should be clearly labelled so all crew know which way is up and any hazards relating to what is inside; 

  This should particularly be the case for containers used for batteries; 

  Consider replacement of the wet cell batteries with dry cell batteries – thus eliminating the hazard of an acid spill. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar battery-related incidents (key words: battery, acid): 

 

 

IMCA SF 01/02 – Incident 3. Dangers of battery charging; 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 2. Battery damage caused by charger failure. 

2 

“Routine” Activities – Non-Routine Result: Finger Injury during Welding   

A member has reported an incident in which a welder injured his finger whilst at work.  The welder was finishing cutting and 
noticed there was some loose slag built up from previous work.  He swept this slag away with his hand and felt he had cut his 
left index finger.  He inspected the welder’s hot work gloves he was wearing and noticed there was a hole in the left index 
finger of the glove.  He was unsure if the hole was caused by sweeping away the slag or if it was already present. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure: Injury to hand 

This was a routine or everyday activity, where complacency had perhaps set in.  

Our member notes: 

 

It is important to retain a focus on the  routine  as well as on significant, major or potentially catastrophic  “high risk” 
events; 

  Crew should remain alert to memory lapse or lack of awareness. 

 
In this case: 

  The welder should have used a broom for removing the loose slag; 

  Gloves are personal protective equipment (PPE) and worn for protection, they are not sweeping tools;  

  PPE should be regularly checked for damage.  Perhaps most especially, helmets, safety glasses and gloves – Change out 

and dispose of damaged PPE; 

  The incident was discussed at welder’s pre-start meetings and use of brooms was reiterated.   The risk assessment for 

welding was reassessed regarding proper use of tools, equipment and materials. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: gloves, cut): 

IMCA SF 16/13 – Incident 5. Hand injuries; 

 

 

IMCA SF 05/15 – Incident 4. Routine task: badly cut finger changing mop head. 

Members should be aware that IMCA has  a  pocket safety card on this topic,  Watch  your hands – you’ve only  got  one set! 
http://www.imca-int.com/media/102527/imcaspc08.pdf. 

  

 

3  Near Miss: Trapped Tagline Pins Banksman against Stanchion 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  a  near  miss  incident  in  which  taglines  became 
trapped under a load.  During loading operations, a banksman was unaware that one of the taglines was trapped under the load 
and that he was standing in a potential pinch point.  As he signalled by radio for the crane operator to hoist up the hook and 
taglines, the trapped tagline became tight pinning the banksman against the stanchion.  The banksman, with assistance from one 
of the load handlers, managed to move the tagline, enabling him to give the radio command to lower the hook.   The crane 
operator lowered the crane hook releasing the banksman.  There were no injuries. 

Some of the contributing factors or causes were: 

 

 

Inadequate supervision and oversight; 

Inexperienced and relatively new crew; 

  Failure to recognize the hazard. 

The incident can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-15.17.pdf. 

 
Members may wish to review the following similar incident: (search word: tagline): 

 

IMCA SF 05/11 – Incident 3. Lack of safety awareness: crush injury during lifting operations.  

Members should also refer to IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

4  Vessel Electrical Equipment Caught Fire 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  in  which  electrical  equipment  caught  fire  leading  to  the 
triggering of the vessel’s fire detection system.  A capacitor in a deck floodlight failed, causing a small fire in an electrical ballast 
unit.  The ships fire party mustered, the cause of the activation was quickly identified, the circuit isolated and the unit replaced 
with minimal damage. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-15.15.pdf. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents: (search words: fire, electrical): 

 

 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 3. Near miss: exposed live electrical cable; 

IMCA SF 14/11 – Incident 5. Diver helmet hat light [caught fire]. 

5  Fire on Offshore Renewables Industry Crew Transfer Vehicle (CTV)     

The Danish Maritime Accident Investigation Board (DMAIB) has published a report on an incident involving a fire on an offshore 
renewables industry crew transfer vehicle (CTV).  The vessel suffered an engine room fire while engaged in the transfer of 
wind turbine technicians in the North Sea.  

The  accident  happened  when  a  fire  occurred  in  the  transition  area  between  the  starboard  main engine room and the 
adjacent  casing.    The  immediate,  technical  cause  of  the  fire  was  likely  a  combination  of  insufficient  insulation  and  possibly 
elevated exhaust gas temperatures from the propulsion engine due to insufficient ventilation. 

All passengers were evacuated, and the fire was extinguished with assistance from other ships in the vicinity.  There were no 
injuries. 

A full report can be downloaded here. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents (search words: CTV, fire): 

IMCA SF 03/14 – Incident 4. Fire and subsequent foundering of wind farm support workboat; 

 

 

IMCA SF 10/14 – Incident 1- 4 – This safety flash concentrates on one single issue – fires in engine room spaces. 

6  Aberdeen Harbour: Annual Summary of Marine Safety Reports for 2013   

The Marine Safety Forum has published information note 15/02, comprising a summary of marine safety incident reports during 
2013, from Aberdeen harbour.  The report contains short details of the 30 recorded safety incidents in 2013 involving vessels 
entering or leaving, or manoeuvring within, the harbour. 

The summary report notes that 47% of the incidents reported were collisions, contact between vessels, or grounding.  It notes 
that in three quarters (75%) of the incidents reported, human error was a cause. 

The full report can be found at www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//notices/marine-information-note-15-02,.pdf. 

