SAFETY FLASH 

July 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1  Vessel Collision with Fixed Structure on Wind Farm 

What happened? 

A  vessel  collided  with  the  working  platform  on  a  wind  turbine  Transition  Piece.    The  incident  occurred  during 
worsening weather conditions.  The vessel was on DP, when it was decided to pull off.  Whilst moving away from 
the tower, a switch was made from DP to independent joystick control.  Once the switch was made, the thrusters 
returned to zero pitch, effectively leaving the vessel without drive, approximately 120m from the Transition Piece.  

The wind was 28 knots.  The action of the weather and sea had already started to turn the vessel back towards the 
Transition  Piece.    The  crew  attempted  to  regain  control  of  the  vessel  using  the  joystick.    They  were  ultimately 
successful in regaining control of the vessel but were unable to prevent two collisions; one between the Transition 
Piece external working platform and the upper bulkhead of the vessel, and a second between the vessel’s crane 
platform and the Transition Piece external working platform. 

Note:  after the  incident  the  vessels DP  systems,  joystick  systems  and manual  control  systems  were  extensively 
tested.  An additional failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) test was carried out.  All systems were found in 
good working order without any technical defects. 

What went wrong? 

The following points were noted: 

  The officer of the watch handover procedure was unclear to those involved; 

  The decision to change over in a position in close proximity to the Transition Piece was inconsiderate; 

  The Master misjudged how the systems would perform during the transition from DP to independent control. 

What were the causes? 

  Poor judgement of situation by the vessel Master; 

  The vessel was already moving against an increasing wind and was still within the wind farm boundary; 

 

Insufficient awareness of DP system handover procedures and the adverse effects in the actual situation.  

What actions were taken? 

  Revision of DP operations manual to fully cover changeover procedures; 

  Revision of DP familiarisation process to include better verification; 

 

Introduction of a recordable in field passage planning. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Full understanding on changeover procedures and relationship between (DP) systems; 

  Full understanding of vessels DP systems and verification thereof (no DP system is the same despite naming); 

  Bridge resource planning, especially transiting between work areas should be improved. 

IMCA seeks to raise awareness of the importance of detailed operational activity planning, both in the offshore 
renewables sector and in the offshore oil and gas sector.  Within an offshore wind farm there are a large number 
of fixed assets which present a high risk to the navigator.  It is considered that detailed planning and care is required 
to ensure safe operations.   

Members should refer to Guidance on operational activity planning (IMCA M 220). 

2  Crewman Received 415v Electric Shock 

What happened?  

A crewman received a serious electric shock when his hand brushed two loose wires 
hanging from the bottom cable entry pop-out of a distribution board.  The incident 
occurred while he was assessing cable routing from the distribution board during a 
mobilisation.  He was preparing to run a power supply from the dive system machinery 
van (MAV) to an ROV LARS.  The MAV had 415v three-phase power supplied and was 
switched on.  The crewman ran the LARS cable to the distribution board (DB) located 
at the back wall of the MAV.  He looked at the bottom cable entry pop-out on the DB 
for a suitable entry point prior to any installation of the wire.  This was before the DB 
was isolated and opened; he was only assessing the cable routing.  He noticed what 
appeared to be two disconnected wires hanging down from the bottom pop-out and 
proceeded to push them out of the way with his left hand to provide a better view of 
the bottom pop-out.  Upon contact with the two wires, he received an electric shock 
to his hand.  He was able to make the DB safe by opening the main breaker.  He then went to the diving office and 
reported the injury.  First aid was given, and he returned to work some 90 minutes after the shock.  

What went wrong? 

The two wires hanging down were determined to be wires that were normally attached to a stepdown transformer 
connected to a volt meter.  The transformer had been removed sometime prior to mobilization.  It was unclear why 
the transformer was removed.  Though some maintenance records were available, there was no documentation of 
this particular maintenance in the system.  

The  person involved  was not wearing gloves at the time of the incident,  as he was working with small wires in 
confined spaces and had removed them to improve manual dexterity.  He was known to be competent and qualified 
for this type of work. 

What were the causes? 

  The immediate cause was that the crewman was not wearing  personal protective equipment (PPE) and was 
able to make contact with live wiring which had been left exposed.  No records had been made of the unfinished 
or sub-standard work which left the wires exposed; 

  The root causes were human procedural errors: 

the exposed live wires were not proven dead before touching; 

 

 

the crewman was not properly informed about these wires possibly being live and assumed they were dead. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Keeping and maintaining a maintenance log; 

  Better communication and hand-over.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Crewman received 440v electric shock  

  Near miss: Exposed live electrical cable 

  Near miss: live electrical cable 

3  USCG: Bollard Failures at Marine Facilities 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Amongst other issues highlighted were:  

  Rotted pilings; 

  Possible pre-existing fractures; 

  Failure of base castings; 

  Deterioration of base of bollards. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published Safety Alert 06-18 entitled Don’t Let Your Vessel Get Underway 
Unexpectedly, regarding bollard failures at marine facilities.   

The alert covers recent shore side marine bollard failures whereby moored vessels were cast adrift.  In some cases, 
this resulted in damage to the involved vessel, as well as other nearby vessels and shore side structures.  Thankfully, 
there were no related injuries or deaths.    

The USCG strongly recommended “that facility owners and operators take steps to develop a routine inspection 
program for bollards and other mooring equipment.  Furthermore, vessel personnel should report discoveries of 
apparently deficient shore side mooring equipment to facility managers.” 

The alert can be found on the USCG website. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

 

Incident as a result of failure of a bollard (2001) 

  Near miss: corrosion-related failure of bolts used to secure lifeboat winches 

4 

Fuel Spray Fire 

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) have released Safety Alert 18-16, 
in which a vessel experienced machinery failure which could have 
resulted  in  a  far  more  serious  outcome.    The  vessel  had  been 
forced  to  stop  operations  due  to  foggy  weather.    A  high-level 
alarm  was  sounded  on  the  forward  bilge.    Investigation  of  the 
alarm showed that the forward bilge was full of fuel oil; the fuel 
was  spraying  from  the  port  main engine  onto the  engine  room 
plates.  

What were the causes? 

Upon further inspection, it was found that the fuel oil secondary 
filter differential pressure sensor isolating valve on the port main engine had cracked, and this was causing the fuel 
spray.  Approximately 1m3 of fuel was lost.  

  The failure of the valve was caused by a combination of engine vibrations and the weight of assembly acting on 

the male threaded section of the brass valve; 

  The  pipe  arrangement  had  been  altered  from  the  original  set  up  because  of  pressure  fluctuations  –  this 
interfered with the proper functioning of the sensor; the MSF notes that the long-term effect of this alteration 
was perhaps not properly assessed by the manufacturer prior to this alteration. 

What actions were taken?  

  Replacement of the brass valve fitting with s stainless-steel equivalent;  

  Addition of a deflector plate above the valve to prevent future failure and prevent fuel spray from reaching the 

hot engine. 

What lessons were learned? 

risks.  

  Always apply the management of change (MoC) process when implementing changes on board;  

  Discussions of the long and short-term consequences of any changes should be had, assessing any potential 

Connection after initial temporary repair 

Deflector plate fitted to prevent fuel being sprayed 

 

 

onto the hot areas of the engine 

The full safety alert can be found on the MSF website.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Fuel spray fire – déjà vu: prepare and prevent it from happening to you! 

  Fatalities: engine room fire caused by fuel spray ignition 

5 

LTI: Diver Injured During Water Jetting Operations 

What happened? 

A saturation diver suffered a lost time injury (LTI) to his left arm during 
subsea  high-pressure  water  jetting  operations.    The  incident  occurred 
when the water jet gun failed, and a part came off the gun.  The diver 
was recovered to the bell and the water jet gun to the surface.  The diver 
received first aid in the bell and further treatment later in the chamber.  
He was subsequently decompressed and transferred to hospital.  Though 
an  LTI,  the  injury  was  not  severe,  and  it  was  expected  that  the  diver 
would return to his duties within months.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Equipment failure: locking bolts on the water jet retro came loose; 

  Unsafe design or construction: locking nuts did not have a holding 

mechanism besides the threads available; 

 

 

Improper  worker  training/familiarization:  manufacturer  manuals  provided  were  not  available  at  worksite.  
There was no awareness of the need for a planned maintenance system (PMS) for high pressure equipment of 
this sort; 

Improper  maintenance:  it  was  observed  during  investigation  that  maintenance  was  not  carried  out  in 
accordance to manufacturer’s recommendations. 

  

 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Management of change (MoC) prepared for required changes; 

  Ensure  equipment  is  maintained  in  accordance  with  Code  of  practice  for  the  use  of  high  pressure  jetting 

equipment by divers (IMCA D 049) and any manufacturer’s recommendations; 

  Additional controls put in place to ensure the water jetting equipment is in safe condition, including checking 

  Further awareness briefing given to dive team regarding checks of the equipment as per the manufacturer’s 

condition of diffuser and locking nuts;  

recommendations. 

Members may wish to look at the following incidents: 

  Diver Sustains Water Jetting Injury 

 

LTI: Leg injury caused during HP water jetting 

 

Injury: Failure of subsea HP water jetting gun (relating to Diver Safety – High Pressure Water Jetting) 

6  USCG: Two Alerts Relating to Gas Releases 

What happened? 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published two recent Safety Alerts relating to unplanned releases of 
different and unrelated gases.  These are: 

  07/18 entitled Ethylene vapors activate Carbon Monoxide alarm.  Take action, retreat, and avoid harm! and 

  10/#18 entitled We’ve all experienced bad gas, but how about IFO 380?  U.S. Gulf Coast Bunker Contamination 

USCG Safety Alert 07/18 

During an examination of a liquefied natural gas (LNG) carrier whose cargo tanks contained ethylene vapors, CO 
(Carbon Monoxide) gas alarms were received which were traced to an eight-inch crack on a cargo vapor line.  

It was noted that the molecular weight of Ethylene (28 g/mol) was identical 
to the molecular weight of CO, which accounted for the CO PPM readings.  
Coast  Guard  personnel  contacted  the  manufacturer  who  confirmed  that 
gases such as methane, propane, ethylene and mercaptan, could actuate 
the CO sensor without ever coming into the range of the LEL limits. 

As a result of these events the Coast Guard “strongly reminds all surveyors, 
marine  inspectors,  port  state  control  examiners,  and  any  other  persons 
utilizing  portable  gas  monitors  and  detectors  while  working  onboard  on 
Liquefied Gas Carriers to remain acutely aware that the ethylene gas vapors 
can exhibit cross-sensitivity.  This issue is not limited to the monitors that 
the  Coast  Guard  uses  but  also  those  made  by  other  manufacturers.  
Everyone using a monitor must be aware that if the CO alarm goes off it may 
be  an  indication  of  dangerous  gases  or  chemical  vapors  and  not  the 
presence of CO.  When the alarm sounds users must take corrective action 
to minimize exposure risks.” 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Bell Contamination [findings related to how gas analysers work] 

USCG Safety Alert 10/18 

The USCG writes: “this safety alert raises awareness of a significant emerging problem in the U.S. Gulf Coast region 
regarding contaminated vessel fuel oil bunkers.  This involves blended fuels oil such as Intermediate Fuel Oil (IFO 
380)  and  has  caused  fouled  fuel  pump  plungers,  fuel  pump  seizures  and  other  fuel  system  related  failures.  
Furthermore, the fuel may increase sediment levels at separators and fuel filters and, in some cases, may completely 
clog filters.  The standard fuel oil test methods found in the ISO 8217 specification will not detect these underlying 
problems.”   

Fuel  oil  contamination  could  lead  to  engine  failures  and  associated  losses  of  propulsion  potentially  having 
catastrophic and wide-ranging consequences. 

The Coast Guard “recommends that vessel owners and managers ensure vessel operators are made aware of this 
potential hazardous condition, closely monitor fuel oil system components and consult their bunker suppliers and 
other technical service providers regarding this issue.” 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Workboat failed during transfer operations due to fuel contamination 

