AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/01 

October 2001 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of ROV Lift Umbilical Winch Brake - Update 

In  the  Safety  Flash  09/01  we  gave  an  update  on  the  design  problem  found  in  a  Macartney  Cormax  unit  manufactured  by 
Norlau (see Safety Flash 08/01).  A member advises that they have determined with the manufacturer of the winches that the 
hydraulic motors were inadvertently supplied without two check valves being fitted (although the circuit showed them being 
in  place).    The  manufacturer  will  be  refitting  all  of  the  members’  winches  with  replacement  motors.    The  member 
understands  (but  cannot  sure)  that  the  manufacturer  will  be  advising  all  other  users  of  these  winches  about  the  problem.  
The member is continuing to operate the winches in slow speed until each motor has been replaced. 

2  Dead Man Anchor Supplied Unfit for Purpose 

A  clump  weight  was  sent  to  a  member’s  dive  ship  with  the  intention  of  it  being  used  as  a  dead  man  anchor  (DMA).  
The offshore manager correctly rejected the weight as not being fit for purpose for diving works on the grounds that it was 
unstable because of the limited steel base of the weight, in relation to its height. 

This type of weight or ‘pill’ is part of a much bigger 50 tonne DMA, which is used for wire initiation.  Its main frame holds 
four pills and is lowered to the seabed empty; thereafter each 11 tonne pill is inserted into the main frame.  The steel frame 
on the bottom of each single pill is used for transportation purpose only and is not intended to act as sub-sea stability for the 
weight itself, which is lifted from the transport frame before being deployed on the sea bed. 

The member advises that under no circumstances should this type of weight or other types which have an inadequate base 
size to height ratio, be used as a DMA; and that inspection of equipment to ensure its fitness for purpose is essential during 
the planning phase of a project. 

3  Vessel and Port Security 

A member has sent a safety notice that was passed to him from a major oil company which is of interest to all members. 

Two stowaways were found on board a construction vessel that had sailed from the Shetland Islands to the Hoton Field.  It is 
understood that the two persons initially arrived in Lerwick by stowing away in a container  on another ship coming from 
Denmark.    They  realised  that  they  were  not  on  the  British  mainland  and  hoped  to  get  there  by  stowing  away  on  the 
construction ship, not realising that it was destined for an offshore field.  They were discovered in a rigging container and 
were subsequently disembarked and handed over to the authorities in Peterhead. 

The potentially  more  serious  aspect  raised  is  that  the two  persons  could  have been  terrorists  with a  mission involving  an 
offshore installation. This could have resulted in a what is described as a very high incident profile, particularly following the 
recent events in the USA. 

The  company  concerned  may  be  producing  guidelines  to  issue  to  diving/construction  contractors  concerning  container 
security/search, ship search/security and security controls when mobilising/demobilising personnel to a ship during port call. 

Whilst  this  was  understood  to  be  an  isolated  incident,  the  company  advises  taking  reasonable  steps  to  prevent  any 
unauthorised people embarking on ships.  Bearing in mind that sub-contractors and suppliers may send containers to their 
ships, they also thought advisable to contact marine agents in all the ports in which they operate to make them aware of the 
potential threat.  They request making in-house logistics and stores personnel aware of the need to secure containers whilst 
awaiting transfer to ships and confirmation from their regional managers that this has been done. 

 

Similarly, their ships’ captains are told to make their crews aware of the need for extra vigilance whilst in port and when they 
are conducting their usual search routines. 

Safety Flash 

4  Near Miss Incident Lowering Concrete Mattress 

A member reports a diving near miss incident when a concrete protection mattress was being moved into position. 

A concrete flexible protection mattress was being deployed by ship’s crane whilst divers were ready to receive it on the sea 
bed.  The procedure demanded that the mattress should be lowered some 60 m offset horizontally from the divers’ position, 
stopped 10 m from the seabed awaiting instructions before moving the load towards the divers.  Visibility was about three to 
four metres. 

During the lowering operation, crane operators changed over and after it was lowered to the prescribed depth, the diving 
supervisor gave instructions for the mattress to be shifted horizontally toward the divers’ position. 

The divers noticed the mattress when it was about two metres away from them but already in partial contact with the sea 
bed instead of about 10 m off bottom.  Nobody was injured. 

On investigation, it was established that during the crane operator shift change, the first operator had failed to zero his meter 
when the load was at the water surface and the replacement operator had not questioned the validity of the meter reading 
showing the length of wire deployed, having assumed that it had been zeroed.  As a result the load contacted the sea bed 
when the operator expected it to be more than 10 m up. 

The  member  posted  the  following  reminder  in  the  ship’s  cranes  and  recommended  that  similar  ones  be  posted  beside 
control panels on all cranes capable of subsea operations in the fleet. 

Please remember the following rules when deploying loads to the sea bed: 

  Before lifting the load off deck, check with dive/shift supervisor regarding the lateral position and initial depth at which 

  Always zero the load or hook at the surface of the water and report when completed to dive/operations control; 

  During  lowering,  inform  control  of  the  depth  of  the  load  every  10 m  until  it  reaches  10 m  above  the  seabed  when 

the load is to be deployed; 

lowering is stopped; 

  Act only on dive/operations control instructions for further crane movements; 

  Change over of crane operators shall not take place during the lowering or lifting of a load. 

5 

Insecure Crane Lighting 

A  sodium  floodlight is  reported  to have  fallen from  a  crane boom.    On  investigation, the floodlight mounting  bracket  was 
found to be cracked and the pad eye weakened and this gave way.  The floodlight swivel arrangement was also found to be 
worn.  No serious injury was sustained on this occasion. 

The member instigated inspection of all boom lighting fixtures.  Ancillary fittings such as these can be overlooked in crane 
maintenance. 

6  Reaction Brackets on the Divex SLS System Backpack 

Attached please find a caution notice recently received from Divex concerning the above. 

DIVEX CAUTION NOTICE 

  

 

Divex Ltd. 
Enterprise Drive 
Westhill, Aberdeen 
AB32 6TQ, United Kingdom 

 

 

 

 

info@divex.co.uk 

Telephone  +44 (0)1224 740145 
Facsimile   +44 (0)1224 740172 
e-mail  

 
Caution Notice No. DVX003/2001
 
Divex S.L.S. Mk IV  
 
Part Numbers D323 & D325 
 
Reaction Brackets  
 
 
 
 
FOLLOWING  INVESTIGATION  OF  A  REPORTED  FAULT  ON  AN  SLS  SET  WE  HAVE  IDENTIFIED  A 
POTENTIAL  PROBLEM  RELATED  TO  A  REACTION  BRACKET  THAT  MAY  CAUSE  A  FAILURE  IN  THE 
ACTIVATION OF THE S.L.S. Mk IV.   
 
Divex  wish  to  advise  all  users  to  check  the  gauge/thickness  of  the  reaction  brackets  on  the  S.L.S.  System 
Backpack.   There is a concern that a bracket(s) with a gauge/thickness of less than 1.4mm may be in Service. 
 
ANY REACTION BRACKET THAT HAS A THICKNESS OF LESS THEN 1.4mm SHOULD BE REPLACED.  
 
Reaction Brackets are available as spares from Divex. 
 
FAULT IDENTIFICATION METHOD: 
 

a)  Visual Inspection: 
 

-  Ensure the metal has not become twisted, bowed or damaged. 
- 

The  reaction  bracket  should  be  at  a  75-degree  angle  to  ensure  proper  activation,  any  angle  less 
then 75 degrees may be an indicator that the activation bracket has begun to bend and that the 
gauge/thickness may be less than manufacturers current specifications. 

 
      b)  In the event that the bracket is damaged or of the wrong gauge/ thickness: 
 

The brackets must be changed. 

NOTE:  Only  a  trained  S.L.S.  Technician  should  carry  out  repairs  and  maintenance  on 

the S.LS. Mk IV  

 
-  Do  Not  Re-Crimp  or  re-use  the  reaction  bracket  if  it  has  been  removed  from  actuation  cable 
assembly, Part No. C2937, or deformed.  The bracket must be a Divex manufactured Bracket, Part 
No. D323 Right hand bracket, Part No. D325 Left hand Bracket. 

After  re-assembly  the  backpack  should  be  donned  and  activated  to  confirm  smooth  actuation  of  the 
counterlung cables.  This does not require the system to be dived. 

- 
 

 
 

For further information contact Kathleen Scanlan on the above telephone or fax number. 
Alternatively e-mail to safety@divex.co.uk 
 

 

SIGNED _____________________________________________________  DATED: 11th September 2001 
 

G.Gilbert,  For and on behalf of Divex Ltd. 

 

 

 

