AB

 

 

 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/05 

July 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

1 

Jellyfish Incident 

A member has reported an incident that occurred during surface diving operations offshore of Western Australia, whereby a 
diver was apparently stung by a Carukia barnesi jellyfish, which led the diver to develop Irukandji syndrome. 

The incident was attributed to the following basic causes; 

the diver was stung and evenomated by Irukandji jellyfish; 

loose overalls had allowed jellyfish to enter at the back of the neck during surface swimming – the Irukandji jellyfish is 
typically between 1-2.5cm across the body and is therefore able to enter through small areas. 

The company involved has recommended the following actions for the geographical area concerned: 

  use of correct PPE for surface swimming, air diving and saturation diving; 

  stinger suits to be worn under all coveralls whilst diving unless wearing a wetsuit; 

  diving hoods to be used at all times whilst surface swimming. 

For those members who are not familiar with the syndrome, the following provides a brief description:  

The  Irukandji  syndrome  is  a  group  of  delayed  (between  10  and  40  minutes)  severe  systemic  symptoms  occurring  after  an 
initial mild skin sting by small carybdeid (box) jellyfish including Carukia barnesi, known colloquially as the 'Irukandji'.  The 
syndrome is well known in tropical Australian waters.  About 5-45 (usually 30) minutes after being stung, the person starts to 
develop  ‘Irukandji  syndrome’  –  a  set  of  symptoms  that  often  include  severe  lower  back  pain,  muscle  cramps,  vomiting, 
restlessness and anxiety.  In rare cases, the victim can suffer pulmonary oedema (fluid on the lungs), hypertension or toxic 
heart failure that could be fatal if not treated. 

2  Caution Notice:  Electric Gasmizer Gas Booster 

IMCA has received the attached caution notice from Divex, which refers to modifications made to the “Electric Gasmizer” 
divers gas recovery systems. 

3  Diving Bell Clamp Mating Screws 

A member has reported the following issue discovered during a routine inspection prior to the commencement of saturation 
diving activities using a bottom-mating system. 

The bell mating screws and clamp nuts were found to be badly worn – one set to such an extent that the nut could actually 
be slid along the screw without rotating the screw. 

Both the screws and nuts were inspected and appeared, visually, to be in a reasonable condition, with both sets of threads 
looking acceptable. 

With the weight of the clamp laying on the nuts and threads, the clamp appeared to operate as it should, giving a false sense 
of security. 

The company involved has noted the need to strip down the clamping system, take the weight off the nuts and screws and 
undertake thorough checks of these components on a regular basis. 

 

 

Safety Flash 

