AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/10 

Safety Flash 

December 2010 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Welding of Shackles 

A member has reported that in spite of clear work instructions and procedures to the contrary, shackles and hooks at the 
worksite  were  being  regularly  modified  by  welding.  Rigging  suppliers  or  individual  worksites  were  carrying  out  welding 
modifications  (mainly  to  shackles)  after  delivery  from  the  manufacturer.    This  practice  invalidates  the  manufacturer’s 
certificate and is potentially hazardous.  

The  welding  of  shackles  (after  delivery  from  manufacturer)  has  the  effect  of  adversely  altering  the  material  properties  and 
increases  the  risk  of  failure  by  various  brittle  modes.    In  addition  to  this  increased  risk,  the  nature  of  the  failure  is 
unpredictable, is not time dependant and cannot be prevented by inspection. 

Our member recommends that all shackles and hooks that have been modified by welding should be removed from service. 
Equipment suppliers should be instructed not to modify or issue modified shackles or hooks for use on any worksite. 

 

 
 

Example of shackle with welded modification  

performed by supplier  

   Example of shackle with welded modification 

performed at worksite 

 

 
 

 

2  Lacerated Chin Caused by Flying Wedge 

An incident has been bought to the attention of IMCA, in which a worker received a laceration to the chin. A worker was 
removing a steel wedge from the frame of a crane track during disassembly.  The wedge dislodged when struck by a sledge 
hammer  and  ricocheted  against  the  frame  before  striking  the  worker.    The  worker  was  taken  to  an  offsite  facility  for 
treatment where he received stitches.  He was able to return to work without restrictions.  

Investigation revealed the following: 

  The wedge was in a bind when it was struck; 

  The injured person was ‘in line of fire’ for the rebound of the wedge after it was struck by the sledge hammer; 

  The injured person was not wearing a face shield whilst removing the wedge; 

 
  Established procedures did not adequately recognise or cover the hazards for the task being performed. 

  The use of wedges for this process should be eliminated and the appropriate alternative tools used for pin alignment and 

  Appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) including face shields should be used for required wedge hammering, 

  More detailed work plans were developed down to the task level, including specific PPE for each task, appropriate tools 

The following lessons were noted: 

removal; 

impacting and banding operations; 

and body positioning. 

 

 

Showing worksite and position of wedge 

 

3  Failure to Calibrate MRU Led to Near Miss 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  vessel  crane  made  an  uncontrolled  payout  of  approximately  27  metres  of 
winch wire.  During crane  operations to relocate an anode skid  the winch began paying out  for no apparent reason.  The 
payout occurred when changeover was taking place between auto-tension and active heave modes.  This should have allowed 
the crane to lift the skid in a controlled manner.  There were no injuries or damage to assets, but the incident was classified 
as a high potential near miss.  

Our  member’s  investigation  established  that  the  motion  reference  unit  (MRU)  housed  within  the  crane  had  not  been 
calibrated since it was installed in 2008.  This had led to incorrect readings from the crane computer system.  The calibration 
had  been  omitted  owing  to  a  changeover  in  companies  responsible  for  the  MRU  and  a  lapse  in  the  onboard  planned 
maintenance system. 

The  MRU  was  landed  for  calibration  and  it  was  noted  that  there  was  a  relatively  high  offset  on  the  heave  signal  from  the 
MRU.  The decision was then taken to change out the MRU for a calibrated spare.  

Following this incident our member decided to carry out a gap analysis of the planned maintenance system of the crane and 
all other major components in safety critical equipment onboard the vessel against the possibility of similar lapses. 

 
4  Diver Safety – Nitrox Generator Use 

The  Australian  National  Offshore  Petroleum  Safety  Authority  (NOPSA)  has  published  the  attached  safety  alert  (NOPSA 
safety alert 44). 

This information can also be found  at http://www.nopsa.gov.au/alert/Alert44.pdf. 

 

 
5  Right Hand Hit by Flying Wedge  

A member has reported an incident in which a member of the crew was injured when a steel wedge came loose and hit him 
on the right hand.  The injured person was working in a winch room replacing the band brakes of a winch and had completed 
similar work on two other winches without any problems.   

During the insertion of the brake belt pin with the help of a hydraulic jack, a steel wedge (weight 2.4 kilograms) was used to 
hold the foundation plate in the right position.  Just before the pin was fully inserted in the pad eye/hinge-point, the wedge 
came loose with a lot of energy, and hit the injured person who was not wearing gloves, against his right hand.  The injured 
person  received  the  necessary  medical  treatment  (four  stitches)  and  was  subsequently  able  to  continue  work  under 
restricted conditions.   

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

  There were two direct causes of the incident: 

– 
– 

the injured person’s position with respect to the job he was doing  
the improper position of equipment used – the steel wedge; 

  The  root  cause  of  the  incident  was  considered  to  be  inadequate  experience/supervision  (the  injured  person  had 

less than three months’ experience on this vessel); 

  A significant contributing factor was that the injured person was not using available PPE (gloves) and was performing the 

task in a tight/cramped working area. 

Our member made the following corrective actions: 

  Time out for safety: work was stopped and incident discussed with personnel involved; 

  Further emphasis was given to the importance of safe position with respect to unexpected flying objects; 

  Further guidance and job instructions were given to relative newcomers;  

  Shared lessons were discussed at shift briefings. 

 

 Installation of brake pin using hydraulic jack (red arrow) 

  The wedge which came loose (yellow circle) 

 

 

 

 

Overview of worksite and position of injured person (injured person NOT shown) 

 
6  Subsea Oxy-arc Cutting – Risk of Explosion 

The  International  Association  of  Oil  &  Gas  producers  (OGP)  has  published  the  attached  safety  flash  (OGP  safety  alert 
number  227),  entitled  Subsea  oxyarc  cutting  – 
found  at 
http://info.ogp.org.uk/safety. 

information  can  also  be 

risk  of  explosion. 

  The 

The safety flash recommends that double isolations that perform a complete break in both poles of the circuit should be used 
between the surface generator and the diver to form a more effective and dependable isolation. 

Members  are  reminded  that  subsea  oxy-arc  cutting  operations  are  addressed  in  IMCA  D  003  -  Oxy-arc  cutting  operations 
underwater and IMCA D 022 - The diving supervisor’s manual (chapter 12, section 15). 

Guidance contained within the diving supervisor’s manual includes that the knife switch should be mounted in such a way that it 
cannot fall or be knocked into the on position.  Ideally it should be a double pole switch enclosed in a protective wood or plastic box 
with only the handle showing. 

Members are also reminded that both IMCA D 003 and IMCA D 022 are currently under review.  

 

 

