AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/14 

Safety Flash 

 April 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fatality During Air Diving Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver was killed during air diving operations, whilst working from a four point 
dive support vessel moored alongside an offshore platform. The incident occurred when the diver was working on attaching 
a marker buoy near to a leak in a 12” live high pressure (800psi-900psi) water injection pipeline. This was so that the leak 
could be located later for repairs. The diver was working in 29m of water.  

The diver successfully attached the buoy to the pipeline but it became fouled under the vessel.   In order to free the buoy the 
diver was asked to move it to the far side of the leak.  At the time of the dive, visibility was reduced as it was approaching 
sunset; the diver used his hat-mounted light to navigate. In addition, the tremendous noise of the leak on the live pipeline 
severely hampered voice communications between the diver and diving supervisor.   

Once the diver had detached the marker buoy he started to move along the seabed beside the pipeline.  He was on the same 
side as the leak.  The diver appeared to look down at some debris and, as he stepped over this material, he was struck by a 
jet of the high pressure water coming from the damaged pipeline.  All communication with the diver was instantly lost. 

The standby diver was deployed immediately using the second diving basket.  Within 5 minutes he had located the stricken 
diver who was lying on the seabed.  The dive helmet (KM37) was no longer on the diver’s head but was lying beside him with 
the neck dam still attached.  Both divers were recovered to surface.  All attempts to resuscitate the injured diver failed; he 
was later pronounced dead by a doctor who had been helicoptered offshore.    

An independent investigation was conducted by an experienced third party Diving Accident Investigator and various findings 
were noted, including the following: 

♦  The diving equipment was functional, in-date, certified and compliant with IMCA guidelines at the time of the incident.  

There is no suggestion that diving equipment failure played any part in this incident; 

♦  A generic risk assessment was used; 

♦  A toolbox talk was conducted verbally for the divers and the hazard was informally discussed; 

♦  There was a flow of work instructions that started off via formal instructions contained in the Diving Service Order and 
email  and  was  changed  later  via  informal,  verbal  commands  and  radio  communications  between  various  parties  as  the 
work progressed which may have caused some confusion; 

♦  Reduced visibility, poor ambient lighting conditions and extreme noise interfered with conduct of the dive. 

The root cause of the incident was determined to be a lack of understanding of the level of risk posed by the leak. 

Our member learnt the following lessons: 

♦  All supervisory personnel should be conversant with industry guidelines and in this particular instance operations of this 

nature should be conducted in accordance with IMCA D 006 – Diving operations in the vicinity of pipelines:  

− 

“In planning to undertake damage inspection on pressurised pipelines it is important that the assessment of hazards 
encompasses  not  only  the  possible  failure  modes  but  also  the  associated  risks  to  the  diver,  diving  support  vessel 
(DSV) and environment.  ROV inspection should be used to conduct any initial inspection.  Diver access should not 
occur until the pipeline has been depressurised to a level which has been established as safe through the engineering 
hazard assessment; 

♦  Hazard  identification  and  risk  analysis  must  be  carried  out  before  any  hazardous  activity.  The  results  of  the  hazard 

identification (HAZID) should be used to inform a job safety analysis (JSA) before the diver, if required, is deployed. 

♦  Toolbox talks should be informed by the HAZID and JSA and should include all members of the dive team;  

 
♦  Care should be taken to ensure that all members of the dive team have fully understood the hazards and risks involved;  

♦  A  formal  documentary  record  should  be  kept  of  the  toolbox  talks,  including  the  name  of  the  person  conducting  the 

toolbox talk, date, time, dive no., and names of persons attending; 

♦  Communication of work instructions to and from the vessel needs to be formalised and if possible reduced in volume;  

♦  Environmental conditions should be taken into account in any diving operation; 

♦  Following a serious or fatal accident it might be appropriate to consider arranging psychological counselling for all those 

involved. 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: diver, pipeline, pressure): 

IMCA SF 12/01 – Incident 2: Negative pressure injury to a diver [when breaking containment on subsea pipework]; 

IMCA SF 14/11 – Incident 2: Identification of differential pressures subsea during diving operations; 

IMCA SF 03/03 – Incident 6: Fatality during diving operation [on a pipeline end manifold]; 

2  Near Miss: Strong Sun Glare Contributes to Heavy Impact on Boat Landing   

A member reported an incident in which a CTV (crew transfer vessel) made a heavy impact on a boat landing on an offshore 
renewable  energy  turbine  tower.  The  weather  conditions  were  1-1.5m  significant  wave  height,  wind  on  the  beam  of  the 
vessel and a flood tide. On this occasion the sun was low in the sky almost directly behind the turbine tower and was causing 
significant glare on the water. Although sunshades were in place and adjusted, the Master found it difficult to judge the final 
approach and landed on the boat landing in excess of the threshold limit of 200 KN. There was no damage to the vessel or 
injury to crew. 

 View as seen by vessel Master shortly before incident 

 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The heavy impact was recorded by the ‘vessel black box’ monitoring equipment; 

♦  Whilst  the  conditions  made  manoeuvring  the  CTV  challenging,  more  than  30  landings  had  already  been  made  without 

incident; 

♦  The glare made it difficult to judge the distance in final approach; 

 
♦  The approach could have been delayed to allow for the glare to reduce. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

♦  Revision of generic risk assessment for navigation along with procedures for small vessel operations; 

♦  Reminded vessel Masters to take into account all elements of visibility and to adjust their passage plans and approaches 

accordingly, including delaying a pickup, if they deem that the conditions are not safe. 

Members may also refer to the following similar incident (key words: turbine, slip) 

♦ 

IMCA SF 16/13 – Incident 4: LTI: Crewman injured foot during offshore renewables mooring operation 

3  Near Miss Incidents during Personnel Transfer to Offshore Renewable Energy Installations     

A member has reported a number of near miss incidents involving a workboat used to service wind turbine towers in the 
offshore  wind  farm  sector.  The  near  misses  related  to  marine  growth  on  the  ladders  and  boat  landing  push  tubes,  which 
became exposed during a period of exceptionally low tides.  

Incidents 1 and 2 

In  the  first  near  miss  incident,  a  technician  slipped  whilst  on  the  rung  of  a  ladder  on  the  side  of  the  turbine  tower,  but 
recovered – there was no injury or damage. The ladder was cleaned by scraping the rungs with a sharp tool. 

In the second near miss incident, some days later, a technician reported that he had caught his knee on a protruding barnacle 
on the boat landing push tube. His immersion suit was not damaged and he was not injured. 

Our member noted the following: 

♦  The incidents occurred at a period of extremely low tides which exposed parts of the boat landing normally submerged; 

♦  Not  all  small  workboats  are  fitted  with  pressure  washers  so  cleaning  of  boat  landings  might  have  to  be  performed 

♦  The manual method of cleaning by scraping the ladder rungs with a sharp tool was not effective; 

♦  Although there was no injury or damage, the crew correctly reported the incidents and proposed revised methods of 

manually; 

working. 

The following actions were taken: 

♦  A change to the method of cleaning - using a stiff brush and wiping with a rag: this was implemented the next day; 

♦  Revision of risk assessment for personnel transfer to turbine towers; 

♦  Amendment of company procedures to reflect new technique. 

 Members may also refer to the following similar incidents (key word: ladder): 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 17/13 – Incident 3: Pilot ladder safety 

IMCA SF 11/11 – Incident 8: Pilot ladder failure 

(Key issues in both – housekeeping and corrosion). 

Members may also refer to the following similar incident (key words: turbine, slip): 

♦ 

IMCA SF 16/13 – Incident 4: LTI: Crewman injured foot during offshore renewables mooring operation. 

Incident 3 

A  technician  transferring  from  a  small  workboat  to  an  offshore  wind  turbine  tower  was  snatched  by  his  fall  arrest  device 
when the bow fender slipped on the boat landing.  

Our member noted the following: 

♦  The bow slippage was caused by an unanticipated wave trough; 

♦  The wind farm operator had made a recent revision to the transfer method, to ensure that the transferring technicians 

were connected using fall arrest devices when on the deck of the vessel and not to disconnect until back on the deck; 

♦  This revision did not include a step where slack in the tag line is handed to the attending deckhand to ensure that the 

line does not become caught if the bow slips; 

 
♦  Concerns were raised about who should be watching for unexpected waves as it seems that everyone was concentrating 

♦  A  similar  incident  had  been  reported  before  but  the  revisions  to  procedures  made  at  that  time  as  a  result  were  not 

on the transfer; 

wholly effective. 

Working in co-operation with the client, our member made a thorough revision of the procedures for personnel transfer in 
this context, particularly addressing the following:  

♦  Slack in the fall arrest tag line should be handed to the deckhand; 

♦  The Master is responsible for monitoring the passing wave sets and warning the crew of any changes. 

Members may also refer to the following similar incident:  

♦ 

IMCA SF 06/13 – Incident 1: Crew transfer vessel trapped under a boat landing. 

4 

 Navigational Near Miss in Restricted Visibility  

A member has reported a near miss incident in which  an offshore wind farm  crew transfer vessel (CTV)  avoided another 
vessel  in  its  path  during  a  period  of  restricted  visibility.  The  incident  occurred  when  the  vessel  was  on  passage  along  the 
designated wind farm traffic route. It entered a fog bank which resulted in visibility being reduced to less than 100m. Upon 
entering the fog bank, the Master reduced to minimum steerage way, posted a lookout in the wheelhouse and commenced 
making  sound  signals  as  required  by  International  Maritime  Organization  (IMO)  collision  regulations.  In  addition  to  this,  a 
second  crew  member  prepared  to  mount  a  watch  on  the  foredeck,  and  the  intercom  external  speaker  was  activated  to 
monitor for sound signals of other vessels. 

Another  vessel  ahead  was  sighted  at  less  than  100m  away.  It  was  at  anchor  in  the  wind  farm  traffic  route.  The  Master 
immediately  stopped  the  CTV  and  then  proceeded  slowly  around  the  anchored  vessel,  which  was  not  making  any  sound 
signals nor was an Automatic Identification System (AIS) signal noted. Although the CTV had radar operating on the 2 mile 
range  the  anchored  vessel  was  not  detected.  This  incident  was  reported  to  the  UK  Marine  Accident  Investigation  Branch 
(MAIB) and the client. 

Showing fog from bridge of CTV 

 

Our member took the following recommendations: 

♦  Amend  the  generic  risk  assessment  for navigation,  along  with  the  company  procedures  for  small  vessel  operations,  to 

reflect this incident; 

 
♦  Ensure Masters are aware of their radar settings, as improperly adjusted rain and sea clutter or gain settings can affect 

reception; 

♦  Ensure Masters are able to use known objects such a channel buoys to confirm correct calibration. 

5  Hand Injury - Grease Injection into Small Finger   

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  the  following  safety  alert  regarding  an  incident  in  which  someone  using  a 
grease gun managed to inject grease into his arm. The incident occurred when the person was using a hand held grease gun 
to lubricate various grease points on earth moving plant. Medical attention was sought resulting in a lengthy operation and 
removal of a vein in the forearm. This was replaced with an artificial vein.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.07.pdf  

This is quite an unusual incident – but it has occurred before. Members may wish to refer to the following:  

♦ 

IMCA SF 16/09 – Incident 3 Hand injury – injection of hydraulic fluid.   

6  Equipment Damaged by Waterspout   

The  United  States  Department  of  the  Interior  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  has  published  the 
following  safety  alert,  regarding  an  incident  in  which  hydraulic  work-over  equipment  was  toppled  over  and  damaged  by  a 
waterspout which touched down nearby. A significant amount of equipment was lost as a result, but there were no injuries 
or loss of life. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.bsee.gov/uploadedFiles/BSEE/Regulations/Safety_Alerts/SA-310.pdf  

7  Pontoon Compartment Explosion on Floating Roof Tanks 

The International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (OGP) have published the following safety alert regarding an incident 
in which an explosion occurred. The incident occurred at a location during restoration activities on a crude oil tank which 
had been cleaned up. Two workers were carrying out hot work on the top of the tank floating roof (cutting rim seal brackets 
in close proximity to the pontoon). One of the pontoon compartments exploded. Flammable residue was released onto the 
tank floor causing a small fire. 

In this case, workers sustained moderate injuries. However similar accidents involving hot work on floating roofs after tank 
clean-up had taken place in the past and led to more severe injuries and fatalities.  

The safety alert can be downloaded from http://info.ogp.org.uk/safety/SafetyAlerts/alerts/Detail.asp?alert_id=255   

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: explosion, pressure, fire, hot work) 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 07/01 – Incident 3 Explosion Caused by Ignition of Paint Vapours 

IMCA SF 05/13 – Incident 1 Explosion causing fatal injury during maintenance of metocean buoy 

IMCA SF 08/13 – Incident 5 Fire Caused by Hot Work. 

