AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/06 

November 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Flash Fire in Gas Supply Equipment Onboard Dive Support Vessel 

A member has reported a small explosion on a vessel, resulting in a flash fire which caused minor burns to the hand of one 
crew member and slight damage to some equipment, including pipework and fittings. 

A life-support supervisor (LSS) was in the process of decanting oxygen to increase the percentage of an 18% oxygen kelly to 
20%.  An oxygen line on deck was opened by the LSS to allow oxygen down into the main gas storage/mixing flat.  The line to 
the kelly was opened and then the panel valve on the diaphragm compressor was opened.  At no time was the diaphragm 
compressor pump running. 

On opening the needle valve to decant oxygen into the bulk gas mixing panel, the LSS a loud crack followed by a flash.  He 
immediately closed the oxygen inlet valve and extinguished the burning remains of a hose with some water from a receptacle 
near by. 

However, oxygen was still escaping from the back of the panel.  The LSS went on deck and closed the supply valve on the 
quad of oxygen.  He returned to the main gas storage/mixing flat, via the saturation control room, to raise the alarm.  Fire 
detectors had already picked up the fire and the alarms were raised. 

The LSS sustained superficial minor burns to his arm and hand, plus singed hair. 

Following  investigation,  a  clear  direct  cause  for  the  explosion/flash  fire  was  not  found.    There  were  three  equally  likely 
possible causes: 

  a failing (crack) in a fitting or pipe, causing escape of oxygen and a flash fire from a fuel source external to the pipework; 

  rapid oxidisation and a flash fire from a fuel source internal to the pipework; 

 

the valve being opened too quickly, causing friction/ignition within the pipework or a sudden increase in pressure on the 
pipework or fittings, leading to it rupturing and allowing oxygen to escape on to an external fuel source, either cause 
resulting in the flash fire. 

The following remedial actions have been recommended: 

  The panel, valves and all other pipework on the diaphragm compressor were replaced; 

  video surveillance was installed in the main gas storage/mixing flat; 

 

 

  a specific line for oxygen was installed, direct from the oxygen quads to the main gas storage/mixing flat; 

further non-destructive testing was conducted on parts of the diaphragm compressor to identify a failing in a fitting; 

internal swab and laboratory testing was conducted to determine the fuel source of the fire; 

  signs were installed above all valves taps stating “open valve slowly to ease the pressure into the line”; 

  a regular and documented oxygen cleaning program was instituted. 

2  Open Lifeboat – Corroded Tie Band Side Plates 

IMCA  has  received  the  following  report  regarding  corrosion  to 
lifeboat parts which could have resulted in loss of life. 

An  empty  open  lifeboat  was  lowered  to  the  embarkation 
platform,  when  the  aft  boat  hook  tie  band  gave  way  from  its 
attachment  to  the  keel  of  the  lifeboat.    Tie  bands  are  vital 
structural  elements  for  the  safe  and  controlled  launching  of 
lifeboats.  Fortunately  there  were  no  persons  in  the  lifeboat.  
No-one was injured, but there was some mechanical damage. 

It is believed that the corrosive environment at the bottom of the 
lifeboat,  combined  with  lack  of  maintenance  over  time,  led  to 
extensive  corrosion  of  the  tie  bands.    Access  to  them  can  be 
difficult, hampered by the presence of debris and bilge water. 

Further  tests  were  made  of  other  similar  lifeboats,  and  the  tie 
bands on these lifeboats were also found to be heavily corroded. 
Though  well  painted  and  appearing  to  be  well  preserved,  it  was 
clear that these were in poor shape.  

 

 

Figure 2 - Tie band side plates connected to the 

lifeboat with three bolts and with one counter-nut per 

bolt 

Figure 1 - Serious corrosion of tie band side plates  

at connection at bottom of lifeboat 

Lessons learnt from this incident include: 

  Lifeboat  tie  bands,  hooks  and  release  systems  should  be  inspected 
and  maintained  according  to  the  manufacturer’s  recommendations, 
and be included in the vessel maintenance schedule; 

  All items encompassed by scheduled inspections should be properly 

examined on a regular basis; 

  Access to, and cleaning of, the tie bands side plates should be made  

prior to inspection of lifeboats; 

  Special attention should be paid to the cleanliness of lifeboat bilges; 

  Corrosion damage of this sort may also occur on totally enclosed or 

partially enclosed lifeboats. 

DNV, which originally issued this alert, has pointed out the following: 

SOLAS does not require people to be onboard when the boat is lowered during 
drills. In order to reduce the probability of casualties during drills, the following 
alternate procedures may be applied: 

1)  Lifeboat first lowered to about 2m above water then hoisted for boarding 
by assigned operating crew and lowered to water for release and manoeuvring. 

2)  Alternatively,  lifeboat  to  be  lowered  to  the  water  without  crew  on  board. 
Crew  to  embark  via  embarkation  ladder,  boat  to  be  hoisted  approximately 
2-3m and lowered again, controlled from inside lifeboat. 

