AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 24/16 

Safety Flash 

 September 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Fire 

The three incidents in this safety flash all deal with fire or the potential for fire.  The first covers an engine room 
fire on a vessel, which led to a fatality.  Amongst the identified causes were a failure to properly assess risk.   

The second incident covers the risk of fire arising from welding in ‘no hot work’ zones – a practice that members 
are clearly still encountering.   

The third incident deals with a fire in the accommodation which was caused by an overheating laptop computer. 

1 

Fatal Engine Room Fire on Suction Dredger Arco Avon  

The UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) has published a report into a fatal fire in the engine room of 
the suction dredger, Arco Avon, in August 2015. 

A fire broke out in the engine room while the vessel was loading a sand cargo approximately 12 miles offshore.  
The vessel’s third engineer was badly burned in the fire and later died as a result of his injuries.  As a consequence 
of the fire, which was extinguished following activation of the CO2 smothering system, the vessel lost all power 
and remained at anchor with its dredging equipment partially deployed for 9 days until it could be taken under 
tow and delivered to a repair facility. 

 

 
The MAIB investigation concluded that: 

  The third engineer was attempting to repair a failed fuel pipe when fuel, under pressure in the pipe, ignited; 

  No one else on board was aware of a failed fuel pipe  or that the third engineer had  apparently decided to 

repair it; 

risk of doing so; 

  The third engineer was using a portable angle grinder to access the repair site and had underestimated the 

  Possible contributing factors to the third engineer’s underestimation of risk were that he had neither carried 

out a formal risk assessment nor sought a permit to work before starting the repair. 

The full MAIB report can be downloaded here.  

Members may wish to review the following: 

IMCA SF 10/14 – All the incidents in this safety flash cover fires in engine room spaces; 

IMCA SF 12/14 – Incident 1 – Engine room fire; 

IMCA SF 08/15 – Incident 4 – Fatalities: engine room fire caused by fuel spray ignition. 

2  Near Miss: Welding in NO HOT WORK Zone 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which welding was discovered which had clearly taken place in a 
‘no hot work’ zone.  The welding was discovered during pre-sail departure checks of the main deck.  The  Chief 
Officer noticed dogging plate welds securing a half-height container had been welded on to a ‘no hot work’ zone 
on the deck. 

The above figure shows Welds on ‘no hot-work” zones 

 
Clearly identified RED ‘no hot-work’ zones 

Our members’ initial finding was that the task was not properly planned or supervised, allowing sea-fastenings to 
be welded on to a ‘no hot-work’ zone. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: hot work zone): 

IMCA SF 08/15 – Incident 1 – Near miss: hot work in no weld zone. 

3 

Fire in Vessel Accommodation – Overheating Notebook Computer 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a fire in the accommodation of an offshore support vessel.  
The vessel systems were unaffected by the fire and there were no injuries caused by the fire or the subsequent 

 

 

 

 

 
actions to extinguish the blaze.  Damage was limited to the walls, ceiling, furniture and furnishings of the cabin in 
which it occurred. 

Location of fire 

“Re-enactment” 

 

 

Sequence of events: 

19:00 – Catering crew finished shift; 

19:15 – 19:20 (approximately) – Notebook computer observed left on the bunk bed in cabin, with the lid closed; 

20:15  –  Fire  alarm  sounded  from  the  cabin  which  had  been  vacated  at  approximately  20:00.    Upon  the  alarm 
being raised the Bridge despatched the AB/crane driver who was on deck to check on the reason for the alarm.  
Door to the corridor was opened and the corridor was found to be full of smoke – this information was relayed to 
the  Bridge.    Bridge  personnel  activated  the  general  alarm  and  mustered  all  personnel.    The  accommodation 
ventilation air conditioning was shut down as per standard operating procedure in the event of a fire; 

20:19 – 20:31 – Fully dressed fire team attended to the fire.  The door was checked for excessive heat and upon 
opening the door to the cabin it was discovered that the fire was by now mostly heat and smoke; the air ingress 
caused by the door opening had caused the fire to flare up.  Dry powder fire extinguishers were used to tackle the 
blaze  and  was  extinguished  in  a  matter  of  seconds.    A  second  fire  team  did  not  attempt  to  locate  the  wall 
mounted fire hose cabinet in the alleyway because of the thick smoke, so a fire hose was run from the fire pump 
supplied connection on the port side of the main deck to provide boundary cooling for the room and the corridor.  
Nearby vessels and installations were contacted to provide assistance; 

20:31 – Bridge were notified that the fire was extinguished; 

20:33 – The Chief Officer and 2nd Officer checked the cabin, and adjacent cabins, for hot spots.  Ventilation of the 
cabins had begun in order to clear the smoke.  The remains of the notebook computer were seen, still on a bunk, 
along with the power supply. 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  The occupant of the cabin had borrowed the notebook computer and was not an experienced computer user; 

  The notebook computer had been fully charged when he turned it on so he didn’t plug it in to charge it; 

 

It  appears  that  the  notebook  computer  was  inadvertently  turned  on  whilst  laying  on  a  bunk  bed,  and  this 
reduced the efficiency of the cooling fan which caused the computer to overheat; 

  The integrity of the scene, with regard to investigation, was necessarily compromised after the incident; 

  The remains of the notebook computer were at the heart of the fire, but had been rendered almost totally 
unrecognisable  after  being  subjected  to  the  fire  and  the  water  spray  –  distinctly  heavy  burning  to  the 
mattress and the wood underneath was evident at the notebook computer location; 

 
  The remains of the computer along with other debris were scraped up, removed and subject to further water 

cooling to prevent the possibility of re-ignition; 

  The  bunk  curtain  also  caught  fire  and  this  allowed  the  flames  to  track  up  onto  the  top  bunk  which  was 
unoccupied.    There  were  flammable  items  kept  on  the  unoccupied  bunk  including  toilet  paper  which  also 
caught  fire.    The  two  bunks  and  mattresses  were  damaged,  as  were  bunk  curtains  and  adjacent  wall  and 
ceiling panels. 

The root cause of the incident appears to have been: 

 

Leaving the notebook computer lying on the bedding would have decreased the efficiency of the cooling fan 
and caused the notebook to overheat; 

  The cabin was left unoccupied with electronic equipment inadvertently left powered on; 

  Toilet rolls were left on the top bunk, this easily combustible material will have ignited and burnt very quickly. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

  Checked  of  all  cabins  to  ensure  that  there  were  no  electrical/electronic  items  which  might  cause  a  similar 

incident; 

  Safety  flash  was  issued  and  Toolbox  Talk  was  held  to  emphasise  the  dangers  of  leaving  electrical  items 
charging unattended.  Also, stating that care should be taken to ensure that fans and cooling vents are not 
compromised on electrical equipment; 

  Signs (stickers) to be posted next to all cabin sockets stating that “No electrical items are to be left charging 
while  unattended.  Fans  and  cooling  systems  of  Electrical  Equipment  not  to  be  obstructed  while  in  use  or 
charging”; 

  Vessel inductions to be revised to include electrical safety – a do’s and don’ts list will be developed; 

  Personal  electrical  equipment  used  in  cabins  will  need  to  be  inspected  and  approved  by  the  electrical 

  ETO to conduct regular unannounced inspections to ensure that there are no electrical hazards present in the 

  Extension cables and sockets to have surge protection and some form of overload or ground fault protection 

technical officer (ETO); 

cabins; 

such as an RCD. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: charger, battery, fire): 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 16/08 – Incident 1 – Laptop battery fire and explosion; 

IMCA SF 17/14 – Incident 2 – Lithium battery pack explosion; 

IMCA SF 16/16 – Incident 5 – Mobile phone charger failures. 

