AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 29/16 

Safety Flash 

 October 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Cargo Handling, Crane Operations, Dropped Objects 

This safety flash comprises a review of cargo handling and lifting incidents: 

  The  first  incident  details  how  acid  was  spilt  when  a  load  collided  with  some  chemical  drums  during  lifting 

operations; 

  The second is about a crane failure which caused a load to come down inappropriately; 

  The third incident is a near miss covering the inadvertent release of a latch on an Intermediate Bulk Container 

(IBC) carrier, which could have led to the IBC falling from height; 

  The fourth covers an injury sustained as a result of the vessel pitching and rolling during cargo operations; 

  The  fifth  incident,  produced  by  the  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF),  is  a  reminder  to  members  to  maintain 

vigilance against the risk of dropped objects, particularly during cargo operations and lifting operations. 

1 

Spilt Acid During Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a spillage of acid during lifting operations.  The incident 
occurred during delivery of deck cargo to a jack-up rig.  While lifting deck cargo from the supply vessel, the load 
made contact with one of the plastic drums of acid stowed on the vessel’s deck.  This resulted in the drum getting 
damaged  and  acid  leaked  from  the  drum,  but  the  leak  was  contained  on  deck  and  the  area  was  immediately 
cleaned.  No-one was harmed. 

 

 
Rolling and pitching of the supply vessel allowed the load being lifted to make contact with the cargo on deck. 

Our member noted the following lessons learned and preventative actions: 

  During  loading  and  lifting  operations,  there  should  be  effective  communication  and  signalling  maintained 

between the rig crane operator and the vessel deck and bridge; 

  Risk  assessment  should  have  taken  into  account  the  weather  and  sea  conditions,  and  any  necessary 

additional controls if required should be put in place as necessary; 

 

In  case  the Master  feels  that  the  weather  is  not  favourable  for  safe  operations,  then  operations  should be 
deferred until the weather improves; 

  Consideration should be given to loading hazardous substances such as acid in appropriate drums protected 

with a cage. 

 

 

 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words, cargo, weather): 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 3 – Fatality during loading operations; 

IMCA SF 17/16 – Incident 1 – Near miss: cargo shifted in heavy seas whilst alongside platform; 

IMCA SF 15/15 – Incident 3 – Spillage of methanol during cargo operations: 
  all the incidents in this safety flash deal with incidents taking place during lifting operations, but incident 3 

may be of particular interest to members. 

Members may also wish to consult IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations. 

2  Crane Malfunction During Lifting Operations 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  there  was  a  crane  failure  during  lifting  operations.    The  incident 
occurred when  a  platform  supply  vessel  (PSV) was  working with  a  platform  crane.    The  crane  lifted  the  basket 
(filled with 5m pipes) to crash rail level, but couldn’t manage to take it further.  The crane got stuck in hoist mode 
for a moment and later the hook with the tilted basket landed and rested on top of another basket. 

The crew, who were holding the tag line, moved swiftly to safety.  After unhooking the lift and steadying the tilted 
basket with wedges, the PSV retreated from the 500m zone.  Later the PSV came back in and the platform crane 
was used to establish the basket properly on deck. 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following and Corrective Action was taken: 

  There was an equipment malfunction on the platform crane; 

  The Master immediately informed the crane operator to place the basket back on deck and arranged for it to 

be secured. 

Our member noted the following: 

 

It is important that the correct load is mentioned on the cargo manifest at the time of loading the cargo at 
base; 

  The platform crane should be properly maintained and able lift the cargo manifested for it. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: crane, stuck): 

IMCA SF 11/05 – Incident 5 – Near miss during lifting operations; 

IMCA SF 05/15 –Incident 3 – Winch brake failure. 

3  CCU Door Unlatched Whilst Being Lifted from PSV to Platform 

The  MSF  has  published  a  safety  alert  regarding  an  incident  in  which  the  door  on  a  cargo  carrying  unit  (CCU) 
unlatched  during  lifting  operations.    The  incident  occurred  when  an 
IBC carrier was being stowed on-board a PSV.  As with the rest of the 
cargo, the door had been closed and secured with a tie-wrap prior to 
shipment.  As the container was being lifted across the installation, it 
was  observed  that  the  door  handle  had  unlatched.    On  opening  the 
IBC carrier, it was  identified that the  IBC  itself  had not  been secured 
within the carrier. 

On further investigation, it was determined that the IBC carrier was of 
inadequate design.  There were no securing points within the unit to 
enable the IBC to be secured and externally there were no buffers to 
prevent the door handle from being snagged by other cargo.  It would 
have  been  possible  for  the  IBC  to  have  shifted  internally  creating 
sufficient force to open the  IBC  carrier  door, with the  result that the 
IBC may have fallen out during lifting operations from the platform. 

The full MSF alert can be found  here.   Further information on CCU  packing and  handling can be obtained from 
http://onshoreoffshorecargo.com. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: door, cargo, lifting): 

IMCA SF 10/13 – Incident 2 – Loading and securing of cargo; 

IMCA SF 15/15 – Incident 2 – Incidents involving poor crane operations (7th bullet point). 

4  Able Seaman Injured When Vessel Moved During Cargo Operations  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  someone  was  injured  during  cargo  operations,  as  a  result  of  the 
vessel pitching and rolling.  The incident occurred when the vessel was engaged in offloading a food compactor to 
a jack-up barge.  The load was connected to the barge crane and was ready to lift up onto the barge, when it was 
observed by the lifting crew that one shackle on the compactor was stuck in the wrong position, rendering the 
load unsafe to lift. 

The lift team leader on deck immediately informed the crane operator of the barge via VHF and requested slack 
on the crane wire in order to clear the stuck shackle.  The crane operator lowered the cargo and once it rested on 
the deck of the vessel, the injured person went to clear/correct the problem and re-arrange the shackle.  As he 

 

 

 

 

 
did so, due to slight to moderate pitch and roll, there was a movement of the vessel which caused the load to lift 
and move towards the injured person, hitting him in the chest.  The injured person was taken ashore to hospital 
for further examination and treatment.  Following examination, he was found to be unharmed and fit for work. 

Our member noted the following: 

  The  injured  person  confirmed  that  he  was  vigilant  and  alert  and  had  noticed  the  movements  of  the 
compactor towards him.  He had attempted to escape from the area, but it was too late and he was struck by 
the food compactor and injured; 

  The immediate cause was a sudden movement of the vessel due to weather condition, sea and swell, which 

in turn caused slight movement of the food compactor which hit the injured person; 

  A root cause was determined to be lack of supervision on deck. 

Our member noted the following lessons learned: 

  There should be timely reporting and follow-up related to any unsafe act/procedure/condition; 

  The  importance  of  toolbox  talks/job  hazard  analysis,  risk  assessment  and  procedures  could  not  be 

underestimated; 

  Better team work in this incident might have led to a different outcome; 

  Care should be taken with respect to space constraints on deck during lifting operations; 

  The capability of the individual to handle/tackle should be taken into consideration; 

 

It  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  persons  in  charge  of  lifting  operations  fully  understand  their  roles  and 
responsibilities and provide effective supervision. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: cargo, crane, sea): 

IMCA SF 21/15 – Incident 3 – Fatality during loading operations; 

IMCA SF 17/16 – Incident 1 – Near miss: cargo shifted in heavy seas whilst alongside platform. 

 

 

5  Dropped Object Awareness 

The  MSF  has  published  safety  alert  16-19  on  dropped  object  awareness.    The  contents  of  the  safety  alert  are 
based on a submission from one vessel owner. 

The  issue  of  dropped  objects  and  potential  dropped  objects  remains  a  persistent  problem  within  the offshore, 
renewables and marine contracting industries.  This vessel owner noted that during the whole of 2015, they had 
received 19 dropped or potential dropped object incidents.  However, by mid-Q3 2016,  the same vessel owner 
had already received a total of 18 reports – and this increase took place in spite of reduced exposure due to the 
downturn. 

Members may wish to look closely at cargo and loading operations and reiterate that there can be no relaxing of 
vigilance against complacency.  The following pictures are all items from back-loaded cargo and all are over the 
weight necessary to cause a fatal injury if they were to fall and strike a crew member. 

 

 

 

 

 

Actions taken/recommendations: 

  Continued observance  of  the  highest  standard  of  good  seamanship  in  remaining  well  clear of  lifts  in  a  safe 

area until the cargo is landed on the deck and it is clear to approach; 

  All dropped or potential dropped objects should be reported as soon as identified; 

  Continued  sharing  of  lessons  and  engagement  with  all  stakeholders  to  encourage  proper  identification  of 

causes of dropped object incidents. 

IMCA publishes safety promotional material on dropped objects, including a pocket safety card, poster and DVD, 
which can be found here. 

The full MSF safety alert can be found here.  Further information on dropped objects is also available from: 

  www.marinesafetyforum.org; 

  www.dropsonline.org; 

  www.onshoreoffshorecargo.com. 

