AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/05 

October 2005 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Crane Wire Failure 

A member has reported a serious crane wire failure.  A night-time recovery of a work-class ROV (weight 4.75 Te) was taking 
place onto a Class 2 DP survey vessel using the ship’s 5 Te crane.  Weather conditions were fair with an estimated 0.5 m 
significant  wave  height  on  top  of  a  1.5  m  swell.    During  the  recovery  of  the  ROV,  the  supervisor  could  hear  the  crane 
hydraulics bypassing the pressure relief valves – indicating a 

n overload.  On trying to lift again, the crane wire parted and the ROV was released to sea. 

  recent and historical damage on the inside face of the swivel sheave cheek plates – indicative of a wire scraping along the 

The company’s investigation revealed: 

  scuffing/gouging of the spelter socket; 

plates; 

 

that the cheek plates had been distorted outwards by approximately 30 mm; 

  damage to the outer face of the sheave wheel; 

  crushing and mechanical damage to the broken ends of the crane wire. 

The company has concluded that the crane wire had been over-recovered in the past, to the extent where the conical end of 
the spelter socket had forced itself between the sheave assembly cheek plates, wedging them apart by circa 30 mm.  This, in 
turn,  allowed  the  wire  rope  to  come  off  the  sheave  and  jam  between  the  wheel  and  the  cheek  plates,  causing  crushing 
damage to the wire.  The additional impact load on the already damaged wire during the recovery of the ROV through the 
splash zone ultimately led to the failure of the wire. 

The root causes of the failure were noted as: 

 

inadequate crane inspection routines; 

  no action had been taken when the existing damage had previously been noted; 

 

the crane had been previously modified without recourse to a management-of-change procedure or consultation with 
the manufacturer; 

 

there was no limit switch fitted to restrict the spelter socket from entering between the cheek plates. 

The company has implemented the following corrective actions: 

  checklists have been modified to include visual inspections of the crane wire and sheave assembly and communication of 

findings to management and crane manufacturer as appropriate; 

 

the importance of the management of change procedure has been re-emphasised; 

  risk assessment reports have been reviewed and updated as required, highlighting the risks of damaged crane parts. 

2  Engine Room Fire 

IMCA has received a report of an engine room fire.  The master and crew handled the critical situation swiftly by releasing 
carbon dioxide.  The fire was brought under control, but the ship lost power.  The ship was towed to port for investigation 
and repairs. 

 

The fire caused damage to machinery components, piping, cables and bulkhead and the engine room was partially flooded. 

The probable cause of the fire was spraying of leaking hydraulic oil onto an exhaust flange which was not properly insulated 
(see pictures 1A and 1B).  The exposed flange must apparently have reached a temperature above 220°C. 

The information received reiterates the importance of identifying hot spots in the engine room, noting typical trouble areas 
such as: 

 

indicator valves; 

  exhaust pipes from each cylinder; 

  exhaust manifold, in particular overlaps between steel sheets and laggings; 

 

turbochargers, in particular flanges to such; 

  cut-outs for pressure and temperature sensors; 

  exposed areas on boilers and incinerators. 

After maintenance and repairs, attention should be paid to satisfactory reinstallation of the insulation. 

SOLAS regulations require proper insulation of all surfaces1 with temperatures above 220°C.  See picture 2 for an example 
of  satisfactory  insulation  of a  flange.    SOLAS  also  includes  requirements  for  jacketed  piping  of high  pressure  fuel lines  and 
screening of pipe connections on flammable oil systems. 

 

Pictures 1A and 1B – Main exhaust pipe 

 

Such an arrangement may have caused the fire.  Note the exposed flange of the expansion joint without insulation.   

The flange has a temperature normally above 220 °C.  Hydraulic oil may hit this flange and start a fire. 

Picture 2 – Exhaust pipe 

 

One example on how the flange can be properly insulated. The insulation and the metal sheath cover the flange completely. 

The metal sheath protects and ensures proper geometry and location of the insulation material. 

The sheath cover is only fixed on the upper side since it covers the expansion joint. 

                                                      
1 “For all ships above 500 gross tonnes, SOLAS requires insulation of surfaces with temperature above 220 °C, which may be impinged upon as a result of 
fuel system failure. For ships built after 1st July 1998 this also applies for system failure of lubricating oil, hydraulic oil and thermal oil. 

 

3  Explosion in a Ballast Tank Causing Loss of Life 

IMCA has received a report of an incident wherein during a repair job in a pre-load tank (ballast tank) onboard an oil rig at a 
repair yard, an explosion occurred in the tank.  The oil rig was undergoing extensive repairs.   

Repair workers using oxy-acetylene torches inside the pre-load tank, had shut the gas torch valves down and left the tank for 
their break.  After their break, when they entered the tank again to continue the job, there was an explosion as soon as they 
ignited the gas torch. 

Two workers were seriously burned and hospitalized.  One of them subsequently died in hospital. 

The most probable cause of the explosion was ignition of gas coming from the gas torch.  On investigation, it was found that 
the valve on the gas torch was not tight, hence gas had accumulated inside the tank during the break, as there was no proper 
ventilation of the tank. 

The following lessons may be drawn from the incident: 

  The  conditions  for  the  validity  of  the  issued  hot  work  certificate  may  change  quickly  during  a  work  shift  and  need 

frequent follow-up; 

  Continuous proper ventilation is vital for work carried out in any enclosed space.  In this case this would have avoided 

or reduced the accumulation of gas causing the explosion; 

  Gas equipment, including hoses, should be well maintained, so as to perform as desired; 

  While  temporarily  leaving  a  work  place,  appropriate  precautions  should  be  taken.    In  this  case,  the  main  gas  cylinder 

valves should have been closed and/or equipment removed from the tank. 

4  Lost Anchor Chain 

IMCA has received a report of a vessel losing one anchor and four lengths of chain cable during anchor handling.  During the 
vessel’s previous dry docking, a number of chain cable lengths had been renewed on both port and starboard sides, including 
a  number  of  Kenter  shackles  (joining  shackles)  as  found  necessary,  due  to  wastage  in  excess  of  allowable  limits.    The 
remaining part of the anchor chain cable lengths and Kenter shackles were at that time found to be in satisfactory condition. 

It was discovered on investigation that the probable cause of the damage was the fracture of a Kenter shackle that had not 
been renewed in the previous dry dock. 

Note  that  the  intricate  shape  of 
the  various  parts  of  a  Kenter 
shackle  means  that  large  forces 
are transferred through relatively 
small 
areas.  Proper 
design  and  well  machined  faces 
and  corners  are  very  important 
for the durability of such shackles. 

contact 

 

 

In the above case the failure may be attributed to mishandling  of the Kenter shackle during the opening/ fitting operation. 
Since in most cases Kenter shackles on old anchor chains are rusty/frozen, and opening up and reassembly requires the use 
of heating or mechanical force, cracks are likely to develop and should result in replacement rather than re-use. 

The  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  this  incident  is,  when  a  chain  cable  length  is  replaced  due  to  wear  and  tear,  the  Kenter 
shackle(s) are normally worn as well and should generally be replaced. 

5  Near-Miss During Heavy Lift Operations 

A member has reported a near-miss incident that occurred during a dual crane lift of a stinger being offloaded from a barge. 

Two cranes were required to unload a stinger from a barge.  Since the lift was a multiple crane lift and more than 100 T, a 
critical lift method statement (CLMS) was required prior to the lifting operation.  The HS&E supervisor was asked to inspect 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

 

and arrange for sign-off of the CLMS checklist and verification sheet.  The HS&E supervisor then requested a control and 
compliance verification as indicated in the CLMS.  After inspecting the area and verifying that everything appeared to be okay, 
the rigging superintendent/crane operator signed-off on the CLMS and the lift commenced. 

While the lift was in progress, the yard fabrication superintendent arrived and asked to review the CLMS.  A check with the 
rigging superintendent revealed that the actual weights being lifted exceeded the weights listed on the CLMS and that, as a 
result, the cranes were procedurally inappropriate for the lift, having inappropriate counterweights.  Subsequent to this, it 
was discovered that no critical lift meeting had taken place prior to the lift, as required by procedures, and that the weight of 
the stinger was incorrectly estimated as 140 T rather than 160 T. 

The rigging superintendent then instructed the rigging supervisor and crane operator to manoeuvre each end of the boom 
load  closer  to  acquire  and  maintain  the  proper  boom  angle  for  a  safe  lift.    The  lift  continued  until  completed  using  this 
method. 

The company involved has noted a number of key factors leading to this potential incident, including: 

lack of judgment and improper examples set on the part of supervisor level staff; 

inadequate review of work instructions, procedures and standards before the job; 

improper loading of cranes. 

The  company  has  reiterated  that  the  failure  to  follow  clearly  established  procedures  during  complex  heavy  lifts  has  the 
potential for serious incidents to occur. 

