AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 12/03 

September 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near-Miss Involving Diver’s Neck Dam (08/03) 

We  were  recently  provided  with  and  issued  details  of  a  ‘high  potential’  near-miss  incident  involving  failings  in  a  saturation 
diver’s personal protective equipment.  This information was issued as part of safety flash 08/03 under the heading ‘Near Miss 
Involving Divers Neck Dam’.  Feedback from equipment manufacturers has highlighted the need to make certain clarifications 
as it was felt that the wording of the flash may have been misleading. 

Divers  were  in  saturation,  with  one  diver  in  the  bell  carrying  out  bell  checks  and  two  divers  dressed  and  making  final 
preparations prior to entering the bell.  One diver was placing his neck dam over his head when he heard ‘something’ fall.  
Suspecting something untoward, he removed the neck dam to inspect it in detail.  He observed that two of the four retaining 
screws in the rear hinge tab plate (at the back of the neck dam) were missing (with one screw ¾ out and the other secure).  
The screw ¾ out would not tighten and it was found, on close examination that the thread had stripped.  The other screw 
was checked and found to be okay.  The neck dam was locked out to technicians and the supervisor for further inspection 
and investigation.  

An inspection highlighted the following findings:  

  The neoprene sleeve to the neck dam had not been fitted according to company procedures;  

  The retaining lug was loose and about to fail; 

missing its locking washer and was loose; 

  Of  the  four  retaining  screws,  all  of  which  should  be  in  position  and  tight,  two  were  missing  completely  and  one  was 

  Specialist adhesive (company procedure) had not been applied to the screws; 

  The tapped hole, which should have held the missing screw, was found to have a stripped thread; 

  The neoprene neck dam had not been positioned/fitted as per the company’s procedures; 

 

It was obvious that the screw had been forced through the neoprene material, as there were neoprene ‘plugs’ found in 
the base of each screw hole. Any torque applied to the screws would have given a false indication of tightness.  

The root causes were identified as:  

  Unauthorised maintenance (neoprene neck dam not fitted as per company procedures);  

  Failure to follow or understand company procedure that only technicians trained in dive hat maintenance are allowed to 
carry  out  work  to  dive  hats  and  associated  equipment  (and/or  a  failure  to  properly  communicate  the  company 
procedures to the workforce).  

The company involved has identified the following corrective actions:  

  Briefing of divers that only authorised personnel are to carry out repair and maintenance on diving hats;  

  Display of signs on entrances to the hat maintenance workshop to the effect that ‘only authorised personnel are to carry 

out repair and maintenance on diving hats and neck dams’;  

  Display of signs on hat and neck dam storage racks in the hat maintenance workshops to the effect that ‘only authorised 

personnel are to carry out repair and maintenance on diving hats and neck dams’; 

  Control stock of spare/replacement neck dams – now held under lock and key so that only hat maintenance technicians 

have access. 

 

The previous safety flash stated that placing of the neoprene directly over the rear hinge tab retaining plate was an incorrect 
procedure.    Members  should  note  that  this  statement  should  have  clarified  that  this  method  of  fitting  the  neoprene  was 
incorrect only in that it was not in compliance to the member company hat maintenance procedures and this statement was 
not  intended  to  imply  that  other  methods  of  fitting  the  neoprene  neck  dam  practiced  by  and  in  accordance  with  other 
member companies established hat maintenance procedures or procedures issued by manufacturers/suppliers were therefore 
incorrect. 

Safety Flash 

2  Regulator Fire (11/03) 

Keywords:  Ignition 

This incident was originally included in safety flash 11/03, but the flash is being reissued in the light of additional feedback on 
the recommendations previously given.  The earlier version has been removed from safety flash 11/03. 

A  member  has  recently  experienced  two  oxygen  regulator  fires.    In  both  cases  the  regulators  were  completely  dialled  in 
when pressure was applied from the oxygen rack.  

The member company provided its workforce with these recommendations to prevent recurrence: 

  Ensure the oxygen cylinders or banks are firmly secured; 

 

Inspect the cylinder valve for oil, grease and damage to the valve handle.  Do not use the cylinder if oil or grease or a 
damaged valve is found; 

  Momentarily open and close the cylinder valve prior to attaching the regulator.  This dislodges any contaminants that are 

present and would otherwise enter the regulator; 

  Carefully inspect the regulator for oil, grease or damaged parts.  Do not use a regulator with oil, grease contamination 

or broken parts; 

  Check that the regulator has the correct pressure rating and gas service for the cylinders being used; 

  Attach the regulator to the cylinder and secure tightly; 

  Stand so that the cylinder valve is between you and the regulator.  Slowly and carefully, open the cylinder valve until the 
maximum  pressure  registers  on  the  high  pressure  side.    Then  open  the  cylinder  valve  completely  to  seal  the  valve 
packing; 

  Adjust the low pressure side adjustment screw to the desired pressure and check the system for leaks. 

  When temporarily shutting down the system: 

Secure the valve on the cylinder; 

– 
–  Open the valve on the downstream equipment – this will drain the system; 
–  Close the valve on the downstream equipment and then turn the adjuster screw counter clockwise to release the 

pressure on the adjusting spring; 

–  Check the gauges after a few minutes for verification that the cylinder valve is completely closed. 

