Safety Flash 

 March 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Diving Safety 

The first incident is a clarification and reissue by NOPSEMA of their Safety Alert 63 regarding quality assurance of 
diving system audits.  The other two incidents are diving-related near miss incidents, covering firstly, suspected 
high levels of C02 in diver breathing gas, and secondly, bailout cylinder and pillar valve compatibility failures. 

1  Clarification from NOPSEMA: Quality Assurance of Diving System Audits 

The  National  Offshore  Petroleum  Safety  and  Environmental  Management  Authority  (NOPSEMA)  of  Australia 
published Safety Alert 63 regarding the quality assurance of diving system audits.   

This was passed on to IMCA members as IMCA SF 03/17 – Incident 2 – Quality assurance of diving system audits.  
Additional information drawn to the attention of NOPSEMA has made some changes necessary.  The alert has now 
been re-issued as Safety Alert 63 Rev. 1. 

“A number of NOPSEMA inspections have identified a trend in the standard of audits conducted on diving systems 
and equipment.  Specifically, a number of operators of diving projects and diving contractors have failed to ensure 
diving system audits have been conducted to an appropriate standard.  While reviewing the audits conducted by 
the diving project operators and the diving contractors, NOPSEMA’s inspectors identified the following deficiencies: 

  Man-riding wire destructive test certification was not adequately assessed, resulting in the failure to identify 
that  the  percentage  deterioration  was  greater  than  that  permitted  by  the  relevant  International  Marine 
Contractor’s Association (IMCA) code/guidelines and therefore should have been replaced; 

 

Inappropriate  application  of  a  management  of  change  process  to  justify  the  deferral  of  man-riding  wire 
destructive tests; 

  Failure to make an emergency services umbilical available for SPHL connection to its life support package; 

  A high pressure (200 bar) flexible oxygen hose was found during a NOPSEMA inspection to be too long, made 

up with joins and was damaged, however it was marked as compliant during an earlier audit; 

  Older  diving  systems  built  to  class  have  not  been  upgraded,  where  practicable,  to  meet  current  class 

requirements e.g. fire suppression systems within diving chambers unable to be externally actuated. 

Each of the deficiencies outlined above should have been identified and rectified as a result of the third party or in-
house audits.” 

NOPSEMA  notes  that:  “Failure  to  identify  audit  non-conformances  associated  with  safety-critical  elements  of  a 
diving  system  may  result  in  an  increased  level  of  risk  to  the  air  and  saturation  divers.    The  non-conformance 
examples provided above have the potential to compromise the integrity of the system  components and reduce 
functionality in an emergency.  Any loss of integrity or system redundancy has the potential to result in serious injury 
or fatalities to divers and others involved in diving operations.” 

 

 

 
2  Near Miss: Suspected High Levels of CO2 in Diver Breathing Gas  

A member has reported an incident where there was an elevated level of CO2 in the divers reclaim breathing gas 
during saturation diving operations.  A dive team was performing diving operations with two divers working on the 
seabed at an approximate depth of 92m.  The bellman was within the diving bell supporting the two divers in the 
water. 

While working on the seabed the divers began to experience breathing difficulties but this was not reported to the 
Dive Supervisor.  On return to the bell for his hydration break, one of the divers experienced difficulties climbing 
his umbilical to return to the bell but put this down to his own level of fitness.  He mentioned this to the bellman 
during the hydration break but this was not reported to the Dive Supervisor.  On his return to the worksite the diver 
again experienced breathing difficulties and asked the Dive Supervisor if everything was OK with the reclaim system.  
On checking the topside reclaim system and discussing his concerns with the bellman, he reported back to the diver 
that all was OK. 

A short while later an alarm sounded on the CO2 analyser for the divers reclaim return.  The Dive Supervisor noted 
the analyser was displaying an incorrect reading.  The divers then subsequently advised the Dive Supervisor of the 
problems they were experiencing, including; agitation, breathing difficulties and headaches. 

The  Dive  Supervisor  requested  the  divers  flush  their  helmets,  go  on  open  circuit,  return  to  the  bell  stage  and 
changed the divers onto a secondary breathing mix.  The Dive Supervisor also raised concerns regarding the analyser 
and  requested  that  the  analyser  was  changed.    The  Soda  Sorb  was  also  replaced  in  the  divers  reclaim  system. 
Following  the  change  of  analyser,  it  was  noted  that  the  CO2  reading  displayed  was  out  with  normal  operating 
parameters. 

Both divers were subsequently recovered to the bell and the dive was aborted with no further ill effects experienced 
by either of the divers. 

A formal investigation was initiated and a report was submitted to the regulatory authorities.  

Soda Sorb is used within the diver reclaim system and absorbs CO2 exhaled by the divers.  This reclaimed gas is then 
recirculated through the topside process system and subsequently resupplied back to the divers.  

In this incident,  the  Soda Sorb  within the  reclaim towers which absorbs the  CO2  was  allowed to saturate.    This 
resulted in elevated levels of CO2 entering the reclaim loop and the divers experiencing symptoms indicative of an 
elevated level of CO2 within their breathing gas. 

  Our member suggested that the following things went wrong: 

it appears a mistake had been made in calibrating the analysers which resulted in them not alarming at the 
expected threshold levels 

the vessel specific dive system operating procedures did not contain sufficient detail on how to calibrate 
and set the alarms for the CO2 analysers 

industry practice is that Soda Sorb is changed based on the monitoring of the CO2 alarms 

the symptoms experienced by the divers at the time were not considered initially by the diver or supervisor 
significant enough to cause alarm 

the incorrectly calibrated CO2 analyser indicated a fault code.  This was not known as a fault code and its 
significance was not recognised. 

  Our member made the following observations: 

it  is  essential  to  ensure  manufacturers  equipment  guidance  is  up  to  date  and  available  to  all  relevant 
personnel on board.  Key information provided by the manufacturer must also be reflected in the operating 
processes and procedures to ensure the safe maintenance and operation of plant and equipment 

it is essential to ensure persons responsible for the set up and calibration of equipment are familiar with 
the procedures for safety critical equipment 

it is essential that persons in safety critical roles understand the importance of systems that have single 
point failures and the value of establishing effective risk control and mitigating barriers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the  importance  of  effective  training,  competency  and  on-going  assessment  for  personnel  performing  a 
safety  critical  role.    This  should  include  practical  competence  assessment,  especially  if  the  person 
performing the safety critical role has been absent from the worksite for an extended period of time 

the importance of ensuring that sufficient detail is captured within dive system operating procedures, on 
how to calibrate and set up analysers including setting of alarms 

the importance of ensuring that manuals used across multiple assets are consistent to ensure the same 
practices are applied. 

  Our member took the following actions: 

 

raising of awareness across the fleet of the key learning points identified during the course of this enquiry 
  engagement  with  equipment  manufacturers  to  ensure  up  to  date  information  is  available,  current  and 

consistent 

  development of systems to ensure the dissemination of critical changes distributed by manufacturers or 

equipment suppliers are issued to appropriate onshore and offshore personnel 

thorough  review  of  diving  operating  manuals  to  ensure  reflection  of  manufacturer’s  current 
recommendations 

thorough  review  of  diving  emergency  and  contingency  manuals  to  ensure  scenarios  of  high  CO2  are 
captured and that the appropriate actions to be taken are fully detailed.  This will include contaminated gas 
scenarios which must be incorporated into the emergency response drill matrix and practices at regular 
intervals 

revision of the competency systems to identify all diving safety critical roles, specification of safety critical 
modules within the competency system to ensure all those personnel in safety critical roles are competent 
in using and calibrating safety critical equipment under their control 

review and amendment of fleet failure modes, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA) documents to include 
scenarios of high CO2 in divers breathing gas 

  all possible mitigations identified in the FMECA to be put in place to ensure risks are managed to as low as 

reasonably practicable. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words, diver, faint, gas): 

IMCA SF 04/15 – Incident 4 –Diver fainted; 

 

 

IMCA SF 01/16 – Incident 3 – High potential near miss: poor o2 content in supplied air - diver temporarily lost 
consciousness. 

 

 

 
3  Bailout Cylinder and Pillar Valve Compatibility Failure 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which there were failures of pillar valves.  The incident occurred 
during visual inspection of bailout cylinders, when it was identified that six out of the twelve pillar valves tested, 
with GO/NO-GO thread gauges, failed the GO thread gauge test.   

Of the six cylinders that passed the original test, four cylinders were rechecked at the next six-monthly planned 
maintenance check, and two of the pillar valves failed the GO gauge thread test.  A possible cause of the later failure 
may have been wear & tear, continual emptying & recharging to 200 bar (at 200 bar there is almost 1 tonne of force 
on the pillar valve). 

Our member has introduced a quality check of cylinder threads and pillar valves whereby GO/NO-GO thread gauges 
are used before accepting any new stock.  When recently purchasing new cylinders and additional pillar valves the 
pre-acceptance tests were performed.  It was identified that there was a surprisingly high failure rate when testing 
the new pillar valves.  Of six pillar valves purchased, four failed the GO thread gauge test.  It is to be noted that 
similar failure rate has also been the case with subsequent purchases of pillar valves.  

Attached are photographs of both the six pillar valves which failed during the original test and two other, order 
replacement pillar valves which also failed the test.  Also attached are photos of a new pillar valve with packaging 
and demonstration photos of successful & unsuccessful GO thread gauge tests. 

All tests were conducted by a technician who is qualified as an “ASSET” Part 1 & Part 2 Cylinder Inspector using 
recently calibrated GO/NO-GO thread gauges. 

Example of a GO Gauge PASS 

 

Example of a GO Gauge FAIL 

 

 

 

 

New Pillar Valve with Packing 

 

Example of New Pillar Valves that FAILED 

 

Six In-Service Pillar Valves that FAILED 

 

Our member’s recommendations and lessons learnt were: 

 

It is recommended that organisations using Bailout Cylinders: 
  establish a planned maintenance system procedure whereby on all 
6 monthly internal visual inspections the cylinder and pillar valves 
threads are checked using the GO/NO-GO thread gauges 

  ensure that cylinders and pillar valves are checked when purchased 
and  before  putting  into  service  to  ensure  correct  fitting  using 
calibrated GO/NO-GO thread gauge and by a trained technician 

 

implement a method of marking the pillar valves so that a register 
can  be  created  to  record  or  link  a  particular  pillar  valve  to  a 
particular cylinder by serial number. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

IMCA SF 12/09 – Incident 1 – Pillar valve failure; 

IMCA SF 19/14 – Incident 1 – Injuries due to failure of diver’s emergency 
gas cylinder; 

IMCA SF 01/16 – Incident 2 –Injuries due to failure of divers emergency 
gas cylinder – use of incompatible threads. 

 

GO or NO-GO thread ring gauge 

A  thread  RING  gauge  is  used  to  check 
the accuracy of an outside thread. 

The GO thread ring gauge should easily 
and  completely  slide  over  the  outside 
thread.    The  NO-GO  thread  ring  gauge 
should  not  be  able  to  slide  over  more 
than  3  threads,  if  it  does  the  outside 
thread is too small. 

 

GO or NO-GO thread plug gauge 

A  thread  PLUG  gauge  is  used  to  check 
the accuracy of a threaded hole. 

The longer end of the tool will be the GO 
end,  while  the  shorter  end  is  NO-GO.  
The longer end should be able to thread 
into  the  threaded  hole  easily  and 
completely.  If not the hole is too small.  
The  NO-GO  end  should  not  enter 
beyond  the  third  thread,  if  it  does  the 
threaded hole is too large. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

