AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/16 

Safety Flash 

 March 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Focus: Fire Hazards, Mooring, Hoegh Osaka 

In this Safety Flash we cover five incidents.  Two recent near miss reports on possible laundry room fires that once 
again highlight  this “evergreen” issue.    The  root causes  were  failure to fully identify  risk and failure to manage 
change.  

During mooring operations, a man was injured by a capstan – his employer had failed to identify or control risks, 
and had failed to suitably heed warnings raised by its workers before the incident.  In another mooring incident, 
fortunately a near miss situation, crew kept on working in a hazardous situation, not thinking to “stop the job”. 

Finally your attention is drawn to an initial report from the UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB), on the 
causes of the recent running aground in the Solent of the Hoegh Osaka. 

1  Near Miss: Laundry Fire Hazards 

Incident 1 

Two members have reported recent near misses which might have developed into fires in the laundry room. 

A member has reported a near miss which might have developed into a fire in the laundry room.  During a weekly 
inspection of the laundry room, rags and lint twisted together were discovered in the dryer exhaust fan.  Further 
investigation revealed more accumulated lint within the dryer’s outlet exhaust pipe.  When the end of the outlet 
pipe was removed to check the inside, it was found that it was approximately 85% blocked by lint. 

 

 
Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

  Although the dryer’s lint filter was in place at the time, the evidence clearly indicates that it hadn’t always been 
in use, or had been used incorrectly – the correct use and installation, and frequent checking of, lint filters is 
essential to avoid such potentially hazardous situations; 

  Use of ventilation pipes and systems can create traps in which lint accumulates over a period of time, especially 
if lint traps are not in use or defective – this creates a fire hazard.  Such venting systems should be regularly 
checked to ensure that they are free of obstructions; 

  There was no management of change (MoC), risk assessment or forward planning conducted to fully assess the 

impact of fitting the venting pipe. 

Our member took the following actions: 

atmosphere. 

Lessons learnt: 

 

Immediately removed the outlet exhaust pipe for thorough cleaning and removal of lint; 

  Subsequently, the dryers were relocated to an external area (winch housing) where they could vent directly to 

  Routine inspections are important – they exist for a reason.  Don’t let “checklist” mentality take over.  If the 
persons involved here hadn't taken the time to carry out a proper inspection, there could have been an actual 
fire rather than a near miss; 

  Ensure that health and hygiene inspections have the same priority as other safety inspections; 

  Take  extra  care  when  dealing  with  tumble  dryers  with  outlet  pipe  connections  –  with  the  permanent 
connection of a pipe, it is more difficult to identify any blockages or obstructions, and motors are exposed to 
increased load and overheating.  Wherever possible, fitting/use of additional piping should be avoided; 

 

In  this  case,  the  vessel  management  decided  to  go  beyond  checklists  –  the  decision  was  taken  to  conduct 
electrical and cleanness checks in the dryer, going beyond the minimum required. 

Incident 2 

During a routine UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) inspection, a potentially hazardous condition was observed 
which could have caused a fire.  The vessel master and crew were unaware of the potential consequences of the 
accumulation of flammable lint inside tumble-drying machines.  A small spark, a short circuit or static electricity 
inside of the machine could have been sufficient enough to start a fire. 

Our member provided the following handy graphic which may be of use: 

Check the vent hose – make sure your vent hose is in 

good shape. 

 

 

Clean the vent line regularly – it is very important 
that the vent line (from the wall behind the dryer to 
the outside flap) is not restricted or clogged up with 

lint.  This increases chance of a dryer fire. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Keep the area around the dryer clean – make sure 

Clean the lint out of the inside of the dryer regularly 

there are no articles of clothing, boxes, cleaning 

– your dryer needs to be opened up and vacuumed 

supplies, or anything else behind or around the dryer. 

out periodically. 

 

 

 Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: tumble): 

IMCA  SF 16/09 – Incident 4 – Tumble dryer fire onboard a vessel; 

IMCA SF 03/16 – Incident 3 – Fire: Spontaneous combustion of towels. 

2  Mooring: Port Operator Fined after Worker Injured by Capstan 

The HSE has published the following report regarding an injury to a worker during mooring operations for an ocean-
going vessel.  The incident happened when a three-man team were securing a vessel’s heavy mooring ropes to land 
in a maritime terminal.  One worker suffered a serious injury after his arm became wrapped around a powered 
capstan. 

Investigation found that the port operator had failed to suitably identify and control risk associated with the use 
of powered capstans at the port.  Consequently, there was no safe system of work.  Arrangements for instruction, 
training and supervision of workers using this equipment were found to be inadequate, as were those for audit and 
monitoring of safety. 

Additionally and importantly, the port operator had failed to suitably heed warnings raised by its workers before 
the incident.  Further information can be found here. 

There is a good deal of training material around regarding mooring incidents. Members may wish to refer to the 
following: 

IMCA Safety Flash SF 04-09 – Incident 3 – Mooring incidents –  a useful document from the UK P&I Club which 
is of interest regarding  potential  accidents that can arise from mooring operations. 

IMCA Safety Poster SPP 12 – Mooring safetyhttp://www.imca-int.com/media/114592/imcaspp12.pdf;  

IMCA SEL 029 Mooring practice safety guidance for offshore vessels when alongside in ports and harbours; 

IMCA DVD SEL 038 – Mooring. 

3  Near Miss: Mooring Without Port Assistance 

A member has reported several incidents in which a shored-based mooring gang was not made available when a 
vessel arrived for a regular call at a designated berth.  Rather than stop the job, the vessel crews had adopted an 
unacceptable routine of jumping between the vessel and the jetty to conduct the mooring on their own.  A third-
party assurance official was recently aboard and witnessed this behaviour  –  he  immediately exercised the  stop 
work policy and communicated a near miss report. 

Investigation revealed the following: 

operations; 

  Neither the client nor the port authority were planning and preparing adequate support for vessel mooring 

  Everyone  onboard  had  become  complacent  and  accepting  of  a  non-compliant,  unsafe  practice  resulting  in 

multiple exposures to the risk of falling overboard; 

 
  Although some vessel crew had raised some safety observations about this situation, no one had elevated their 

concerns to shore-side management or raised a near miss report; 

  The stop work policy was not being implemented by the crew – it took a visiting third party to identify the 

hazardous occurrence, put a stop to it, and report it to the office. 

Summary of actions taken: 

  The  client  was  informed  immediately.    The  client  provided  feedback  with  acceptance  and  commitment  to 

addressing the issue to ensure it did not happen again; 

  Shore-based management have strongly engaged the client and port authority – the vessel has since called at 
the  berth  on  several  occasions  and  mooring  gangs  have  been  present  for  all  mooring  and  unmooring 
operations; 

  A  company  regional  director  immediately  conducted  a  vessel  visit  to  engage  with  the  Master  and  crew  to 

discuss the incident. 

Our member notes that when crew members draw attention to unsafe acts or unsafe conditions, or any hazardous 
occurrences, these should be brought to the knowledge of shipboard management and action should be taken – it 
is not acceptable to ignore these or do nothing. 

Members’ attention is drawn to the following: 

IMCA DVD SEL 038 – Mooring; 

 

 

 

IMCA SEL 029 Mooring practice safety guidance for offshore vessels when alongside in ports and harbours; 

IMCA Safety Flash SF 04/09 – Incident 3 – Mooring incidents – a useful document from the UK P&I Club which 
is of interest regarding  potential  accidents that can arise from mooring operations. 

4 

Listing, Flooding and Grounding of Vehicle Carrier Hoegh Osaka 

The  MAIB  has  published  Accident  Investigation  Report  6/2016 
regarding the recent listing, flooding and grounding of vehicle carrier 
Hoegh Osaka. 

In summary, the report notes that the vessel developed a significant 
starboard  list  when  turning  to  port,  not  long  after  it  was  departing 
Southampton, UK.  As the list increased in excess of 40º, the vessel lost 
steerage and propulsion, and subsequently drifted aground.  A cargo 
shift,  as  the  vessel  listed,  resulted  in  a  breach  of  the  hull  and 
consequent  flooding.    All crew were  safely  evacuated  from  the  ship 
and surrounding waters.  There was no resulting pollution, and the vessel was later successfully salvaged. 

It was shown through subsequent stability modelling and analysis that the vessel listed heavily to starboard while 
turning as a result of having inadequate stability, which had not been identified prior to departure. 

The MAIB raised the following safety issues: 

  Assessing a ship has adequate stability for its intended voyage on completion of cargo operations and before it 

sails is a fundamental principle of seamanship that must not be neglected; 

  A loading computer is an effective and useful tool for the safe running of a ship.  However, its output can only 

be as accurate as the information entered into it; 

 

It is imperative that working practices enable correct information to be provided and that sufficient time is 
made available before departure for an accurate stability calculation to be completed; 

  An accurate stability calculation before departure is fundamental to safety. 

The full report from the MAIB can be found here.  

