AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/03 

September 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety matters  and incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons learned  from  them.    The information  below has been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Topic Working with Tubulars – Incident Report 

Keywords:  Lifting 

While carrying out backloading operations at a rig, a crewman suffered a lost time injury.  The operation being carried out at 
the time was the movement of tubulars to make room for an extra 50ft basket.  There were a number of learning points, 
which came out of the inquiry into this incident, which if instigated should prevent a recurrence of this type of incident. 

1.  No backload list had been supplied to the vessel to allow a loading plan to be produced before backloading commenced. 
The  basket  was  also  an  additional  item,  which  was  only  prepared  for  backloading  after  the  original  backloading  was 
complete. 

 

This was an incident that occurred in the UK sector. The company notes that the preparation of a deck plan prior to loading 
is a requirement under the UK Code of Safe Working Practices for Merchant Seamen. It is also recommended that vessels 
are included in any work planning discussions that involve the use of the vessel. 

2. 

This was the second time the tubulars had been moved during this voyage. The tubulars were in different size bundles 
and of differing lengths. There were not enough tubulars to make use of the pipe stanchions viable.   

The  United  Kingdom  Offshore  Operators  Association  (UKOOA)  Guidelines  on  Safe  Handling  and  Packaging  recommends 
that small tubulars be transported in racks. 

Inadequate  risk  assessments  were  carried  out  onboard  the  vessel  when  the  task  changed  from  a  standard  lifting 
process. The strops of one of the tubulars being moved were trapped and therefore the crane hooks were put through 
a bight on the strops to try and free them. Also when one of the strops failed to come free and it was decided just to 
straighten up the stow of that tubular, there was no reassessment. There were job discussions as to what to do (i.e. 
toolbox talks), but these did not include a discussion on the associated risks. 

 

Tasks should be re-risk assessed any time the job changes. 

At  no  time  did  anyone  call  a  ‘time  out  for  safety’  when the  operation  changed.    Also  nobody  stopped  the  crewman 
going into danger when they saw him. (Crewman was seen to walk on the unsecured tubulars to grab hold of the for’d 
crane hook, instead of waiting for the hook to come to him). 

 

All crew were aware of their ‘stop work’ authority, but did not exercise it when it was important to do so. 

The  crew  of  the  vessel  knew  that  the  statutory  procedures  for  backloading  were  not  being  followed,  but  saw  the 
process as ‘common practice’ when working rigs. The company stated that during the investigation a comment that was 
made quite a few times regarding working on a rig was that “you never know what you are going to backload until it is 
on the hook,” thus there still seems to be acceptance of ‘common practice,’ which is not always ‘best practice’. 

6. 

There was a general acceptance both on the vessel and the installation that non-compliance with the UKOOA PSV and 
Packing guidelines was accepted. 

The company notes that all companies have accepted the need for common guidelines and practices and that Masters should 
be encouraged to challenge installations which are not complying and vice versa. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

 

 

 

2  Airline Coupling Failure 

Keyword:  Hoses 

We have received the following report of an incident which occurred during internal cleaning operations in a produced water 
de-gasser  which  was  being  undertaken  by  two  contract  cleaners.    This  vessel  had  been  open  for  over  a  week  and  forced 
extraction  was  in  place  to  ensure  that  fresh  air  was  being  drawn  in.  In  line  with  normal  operating  procedures  the  two 
cleaners were working under air from a breathing apparatus air line unit fed from a breathing apparatus compressor. During 
the operation a coupling on the air line parted, terminating the primary source of air supply. The problem was immediately 
recognised by the vessel entry control personnel and both cleaners immediately opened the air supply from their personal 
secondary supply and withdrew from the vessel to a place of safety. 

The  inventory  of  breathing  apparatus  (BA)  air  hoses  was  collected  together  for  inspection  and  on  cursory  inspection  the 
male and female connections looked identical on all hoses. The inspection data, certificates and equipment register also did 
not indicate any difference between the types of hose. 

However, on closer inspection the male fitting indicated a slight difference (see below) which appears to prevent satisfactory 
connection with the female fitting. The pictures below indicate the difference in the appearance of the made up joints. Both 
joints hold when tested by hand on initial set up, but the dissimilar tubing fitting is not secure if the tubing is flexed, indicating 
it does not make a tight/locked connection on the make up. 
 

Both  ‘male’  connectors.  Both  ‘female’  connections  look 
identical superficially. 
 

Groove present on this one but not obvious on 
a cursory examination. 
 

Black  ‘male’  connection  to  blue  ‘female’  connection. 
This combination is the only one that would not seat 
correctly. 
 

Note  the  gap.  NB  some  pressure  is  being 
exerted to push the connection together. 
 

Blue ‘male’ connection to blue ‘female’ connection.  

A tight connection. No pressure. 

 

 

 

  Male connections were not stabbing fully into the female connection because of the slight differences in the design of the 

 

The following key lessons have been noted: 

male connectors; 

  Back up air systems worked correctly; 

  Safety procedures were complied with. 

The company involved has made the following recommendations: 

  A  system  is  to  be  put  in  place  to  record  that  equipment  has  been  fully  checked  each  day  before  being  used  on  a 

worksite, to include a supervisor’s signature; 

  The contractor is to establish how it was that it was supplied with hoses with ‘mixed’ fittings with the project equipment; 

  A new set of compatible hoses has been requested of the contractor. 

3 

Internal Explosion within 12V Forklift Battery 

Keyword:  Battery 

A  forklift  battery  was  found  to  be  flat  and  it  was  changed  out  with  a  replacement  that  was  held  onboard  and  tested  per 
procedures, the forklift was also function tested and all were working satisfactorily.  The following morning the pre-start up 
checks on the forklift were carried out, and no problems were identified.  The forklift operator than attempted to start the 
engine.  As he did this he heard a loud noise from behind him, he immediately switched off the engine, and turned to see 
vapour and electrolyte spilling from the battery compartment. The spill was contained, and the electrician was called to make 
the area safe by disconnecting the battery.  The battery was found to have a ruptured cell and was returned to the supplier 
to determine the cause of the failure.  The battery was a 12 volt, sealed, lead acid type. 

On inspection it was found that the cell plates within the battery had sulphated and dried, the mud space was also found to 
be full, which is a natural process with age and this combination had led to an internal explosion.  The failure occurred inside 
the  battery  enclosure,  which  protected  personnel  from  flying  battery  case  particles  and  electrolyte.    The  electrolyte  that 
spilled had drained from two holes in the base of the battery compartment. 

The company involved has made the following recommendations: 

  Change out all batteries of sealed lead acid type annually. 

  Future permits to work (PTW) and maintenance procedures should take this incident into consideration, if jump starting 

or fault diagnosis is carried out with the battery exposed. 

4  Fire Inside Falcom Steamer 

Keyword:  Fire 

We have received a report of an incident which began when a night cook baker, returning to the galley after his break, smelt 
burning.    He  then  noticed  that  there  was  smoke  coming  from  the  top  of  the  steamer.    He  then  informed  the  facilities 
manager, who accompanied the baker to the galley to investigate.  The manager slowly opened the steamer door and could 
see that the elements on the base of the steamer were glowing red.  A fire then ignited.  The manager immediately closed 
the  door  to  contain  the  fire  within  the  stainless  steel  unit  and  then  switched  off  the  power  from  the  main  control  panel.  
The fire was extinguished by starving it from oxygen.  The OIM was informed immediately and assessed that the machine was 
made safe and an investigation would be completed. 

Investigation showed that there was a blockage in the pipe that feeds the water into tank and unit.  There was no system that 
warned of lack of water to the unit and no fail-safe, e.g. the thermostat cut-off to the elements. 

The company’s subsequent recommendations were as follows:  

  A daily visual check to be made to ensure water is flowing freely to the units. 

  Contact manufacturers to enquire if a fail-safe device could be installed within this unit. 

 

Keywords:  Batteries 

5  Follow-Up to Toxic Gas Emission from Transponder (Lithium Batteries) 

Further  to  the  information  provided  in  safety  flash  01/03,  Kongsberg  Simrad  has  now  updated  its  transponder  safety 
information.  This can be found at www.kongsberg-simrad.com by following ‘Products’, ‘Transponders’ then ‘Battery Safety’. 

Users of alternative systems are advised to contact their own suppliers for product-specific information. 

6  Loss of Mooring Chain to FPSO 

Keywords:  Winch 

A planned routine maintenance operation was in progress, to individually move each of eight anchor chains, to a pre-arranged 
plan,  to  ensure  that  the  chain  links  were  not  subject  to  wear  and  fatigue  at  the  same  points  over  the  life  of  the  mooring 
chain.  This operation had been repeated successfully on an annual basis for the four previous years. 

The  linear  tensioner  assembly  equipment  was  pressured  up  to  allow  for  the  stowing  of  two  links  of  chain  for  tensioner 
number 5.  The chain was lifted by energising the rams to raise the chain gripper and the chain stopper was opened.  When 
the rams reached their full extent, the operator tried to close the chain stopper, to engage the chain in its new position.  The 
chain stopper would not fully engage. 

The rams were lowered back to the start position and a second attempt was made.  Once again, the chain stopper could not 
be engaged, due to an incorrect chain position (i.e. they tried to close on the side of the link, rather than on the shoulder of 
the link). 

After the second failed attempt, the operator made the decision to lower the rams to stow the chain in its original position 
and  report  the  problem.    As  the  rams  were  being  lowered,  the  operator  heard  a  loud  noise,  realised  there  was  a  major 
problem and abandoned the immediate worksite.  The failure of the equipment assembly resulted in the gypsy wheel being 
torn from the deckhead.  The upper assembly sheared off of the rams and the chain grippers sheared their retaining bolts, 
allowing the chain to fall freely and pay out of the locker.  The bitter end shackle pin broke in the chain locker and the chain 
paid out to the seabed. 

As  a  result  of  a  lengthy  investigation,  including  the  company  involved  and  the  equipment  manufacturer,  the  follow  lessons 
learned have been noted: 

  The size variation of the individual chain links had had a major impact on the (re)design of chain tensioning equipment, 
which had not been fully understood or taken into account in the original design.  This had had a significant impact on 
both the chain gypsy wheel design and the chain gripping arrangement; 

  Changes made during the design stages had not been fully evaluated for their effect on the installed equipment, resulting 
in the need to redesign and change out the gypsy wheel and to extend the full hydraulic ram lifting movement, which was 
insufficient to allow for the tolerances on the mooring chain and correct engagement of the stoppers at certain points in 
the chain; 

  The  angle  of  engagement  between  the  mooring  chain  and  the  upper  grippers  during  the  chain  moving  operation  was 

critical.  If there was an increased angle, there was the potential for the chain weight to force open the upper grippers. 

The company involved has made the following recommendations: 

  The gypsy wheel and its support structure are to be redesigned, to ensure that bearing and chain snagging are eliminated.  

The planned maintenance regime will be redeveloped, to ensure the necessary maintenance tasks are carried out; 

  The tensioner assembly is to be modified to lock chain grippers and stoppers in place hydraulically, to ensure correct 

alignment and to prevent movement and chain release due to chain loading; 

  A  modification  will  be  made  to  increase  the  ram  travel  distance,  to  ensure  that  correct  stopper  engagement  can  be 

achieved when a chain is lifted, taking into account chain link tolerances and variations; 

  A remote control device is to be fitted, to allow the operator to be well clear of the equipment when chain movement 

operations take place. 

7  Filtration Materials 

Keywords:  Breathing Air Compressors 

Please see the attached safety notice from Divex regarding filter materials for use in breathing air compressors. 

  

 

info@divex.co.uk 

Telephone  +44 (0)1224 740145 
Facsimile   +44 (0)1224 740172 
e-mail  

Divex Ltd. 
Enterprise Drive 
Westhill, Aberdeen 
AB32 6TQ, United Kingdom 

 
 
DIVEX SAFETY NOTICE 
 
 
 
Safety Notice No. DVX001/2003
 
Filtration Materials  
 
Breathing Air Compressors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please  be  advised  that  from  the  date  of  this  letter  Divex  Limited  will  no  longer  supply  loose  filter 
materials  to  enable  customers  to  re-fill  filter  cartridges  for  use  in  high  pressure  breathing  air 
compressors. 
 
 
It  has  long  been  the  policy  of  our  principals,  Bauer  Kompressoren,  that  only  factory  supplied  and 
sealed filter cartridges should be used in their breathing air compressors. 
These cartridges were never designed to be opened and re-filled by operators. 
 
 
We are aware that some users operating in remote areas have been carrying out this procedure in 
the  interests  of  economy  and  logistics,  but  recent  incidents  involving  other  than  factory  supplied 
cartridges have highlighted the inherent danger of this practice. 
 
 
We apologise for any inconvenience this may cause to our compressor operating customers but I am 
sure you will see the wisdom of our actions. 
 
 
For and on behalf of Divex Limited, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

SIGNED _____________________________________________________  DATED: 6th August 2003 
 

G.Gilbert, for and on behalf of Divex Ltd. 

 

 

 

