Safety Flash 

October 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 26/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

I

m
a
g
e
:
 
h
t
t
p
:
/
/
h
e
a
l
t
h
f
a
c
t
s
.
n
g

1 

Loss of Sight in Right Eye: Misdiagnosis of Illness 

What happened 

A crew member on an ocean-going cargo vessel lost the sight 
in his right eye.  He was self-medicating what he thought was a 
common  cold  for  4-5  days  before  he  sought  help  from  the 
Master.  The Master initially continued to treat what he also 
believed to be a common cold. 

The  crewman  had  a  liver  infection  which,  due  to  some 
deficiency in his immune system, quickly spread and affected 
his right eye.  It became apparent that the crewman had a more 
serious condition affecting his eyes, particularly his right eye.  
Medical advice was sought on the radio, and that advice was to administer antibiotics (Septrin) and paracetamol 
for fever while on board.  He was later referred to hospital when the vessel reached port, for further treatment. 

 

  The immediate cause was found to be that the crewman did not report to the Master earlier or seek immediate 

  A causal factor was that the Master assumed that the diagnosis was not critical – that it was a common cold; 

  The root cause was found to be ‘Inadequate Compliance/Tolerable risk – Self-medicating for common cold’. 

What went wrong/causes 

medical attention; 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  Crew encouraged to report diagnosis and seek immediate attention for any medical treatment; 

  Private medication held by vessel crew to be registered with shipboard management and reason for its use to 

be known to the Master; 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Dangers of medicine abuse 

Members may wish to refer to IMCA SEL 033 – Guidance on occupational health 

 

 

2  High Potential Dropped Object Near Miss: Object Fell from Cargo 

What happened 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) reports an incident in which a piece of grating weighing 17kg fell from a load.  It 
fell 6-7m to deck.  Crew were on deck but not nearby. There were no injuries or environmental impact. 

The incident occurred when the rig’s starboard crane was tasked with repositioning a cargo tank on the aft deck of 
the vessel, so it could be secured more effectively before vessel departure.  Whilst manoeuvring the lift, a piece of 
grating from the top of the tank fell from 6-7m to deck.  Two deck crew were around 15m forward of where the 
object landed. 

The incident was  considered to have  high potential.  A 17kg object  falling 6m and hitting someone  would be  a 
potential fatality. 

What went wrong/causes 

The tank frame has grating sections on the top of the unit to allow crew to get to the hatch on the top.  The centre 
sections of grating hinge to allow the hatch to be opened. The outer sections of the grating are intended to be fixed 
in place with four bolts and butterfly clips. 

On subsequent investigation in port it was found that only one clip was correctly fitted on one side grating and all 
four clips appeared slack on the side from which the grating fell.  One of the clips was also bent. 

 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

 

Instructions were given to the tank vendor to ensure checks are made to the securing arrangements on all their 
cargo units; 

  The  MSF  has  issued  this  safety  alert  to  warn  all  other  suppliers,  vendors,  logistics  service  providers,  road 
transport companies, vessel and installation crews of the dangers of unsecured loose objects on cargo units 
and  the  potential  for  dropped  objects.    Loading  and  discharging  cargo  in  an  offshore  environment  is  very 
dynamic  often  with  significant  vessel  and  crane  hook  motion  which  may  sometimes  lead  to  the  cargo  unit 
colliding with other containers or structures, leading to potentially dislodging loose items; 

  This incident aptly demonstrates the importance of vessel and installation crews staying well clear of suspended 

crane lifts at all times where there is a potential for falling objects. 

See here for the original MSF Safety Alert. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

  Near-miss: Dropped object from cargo 

 

Loading and securing of cargo 

  More than a dropped object – The need for vigilance during cargo operations 

 

 

3  Pin from Crane Block Sheave Guard Fell 25m 

What happened 

A member of UK Step Change in Safety reports an incident in which a main block sheave guard came loose from the 
main crane block and fell approximately 25m to the deck below. 

The incident occurred when a  container was  being repositioned on a laydown area. The crane was being used, 
utilising the whip line and a pennant. The crane main block was not used due to the low weight of the load. 

During the lift, a member of the deck crew heard a loud noise. On investigation, he found that the securing pin from 
a main block sheave guard had come loose, and had fallen to deck.  Crane operations were immediately halted and 
the crane main block was brought to deck level for inspection. The fallen part weighed 0.8kg and fell 25m; it landed 
2m from a member of the deck crew.  This is could have been a potential fatality on the DROPs calculator. 

 

 

 

 

What went wrong/causes 

 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

The sheave guide was secured by a spring clip. The crane block was supplied with this spring clip configuration.  
It cannot be determined if the clip had failed or was not installed correctly. 

The spring clip on the sheave guide was removed and replaced by a bolted configuration.  All cranes in the fleet 
were  inspected  to  ensure  the  same  configuration  was  not  present;  if  it  was,  it  was  corrected.    Suppliers  were 
informed of incident to ensure they no longer supply blocks with this configuration.  Planned maintenance tasks 
were amended to ensure checks are carried out on condition of sheave guards. 

The Step Change in Safety ‘Safety moment’ can be found here. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Near miss: Rigging recovered with missing nut from tri-plate shackle 

  Near miss: Dropped object fell from crane boom 

 

 

Stored  Energy  Near  Miss:  Person  Nearly  Hit  by  Equipment  Caught  During  Light  Daughtercraft 
Operations 

 

4 

What happened 

A stand-by diver on a light daughtercraft (LDC) was nearly hit by a flying block and tackle, which was thrown towards 
him by an unplanned release of tension during mooring operations.  The incident occurred when a team of divers 
were  carrying  out  a  familiarisation  diver  rescue  drill  in  preparation  to  work  from  an  LDC  alongside  a  floating 
production  storage  and  offloading  unit  (FPSO).    In  preparing  to  return  to  the  mother  vessel,  the  LDC  was 
disconnected from two mooring lines suspended from the FPSO.  The forward FPSO mooring line caught under the 
T-section of a removable diver rescue davit arm installed on the LDC. This created a tension on the arm which self-
released, causing the arm to move very suddenly.  Attached to the end of the arm was a block and tackle weighing 
approx. 1.5kg. This was jettisoned at head height and flung towards a bulkhead adjacent to the stand-by diver. 

What went wrong? 

Investigation concluded that the incident occurred as a result of the LDC drifting forward whilst being made ready 
for transit, with the diver rescue davit in the deployed position.  The deck crew on the LDC were preoccupied in the 
stowage of equipment and did not notice the LDC had drifted forward to the point where the forward mooring line 
was midships with the LDC.  When the coxswain engaged the motor to depart the worksite, the mooring line had 
caught under the T-section of the diver rescue davit; when the LDC turned to starboard, the davit arm forcefully 
recoiled to its stowage position. 

What were the causes? 

  The coxswain console is on the starboard side of the LDC and is fitted with a TV monitor for observing both 

sides of the LDC. The port monitor was not working; the cox could only see the starboard side; 

  The diver rescue davit had been left in the deployed position as a diver recovery drill had just been concluded; 

  The  team  were  under  the  impression  they  were  required  to  hurry  back  to  the  mother  vessel.    As  a  result, 

preparations for LDC transit were not thorough enough; 

  Procedures for connecting and disconnecting mooring lines to the LDC did not specify that confirmation should 

be made that all lines were disconnected and the LDC was ready to transit. 

Lessons learnt 

  This was the first time that six of the seven divers on the LDC had been involved in the operation and even 
though  all  personnel  had  completed  the  diving  contractor’s  familiarisation  programme,  no  time  had  been 
factored into the schedule for practical exercises; 

 

Interim project crew changes were partially staggered to facilitate continuity of personnel, but the number of 
personnel required to carry out marine type training exercises on the LDC for diving personnel was not defined; 

  This  particular  vessel  is  a  purpose  built  LDC  and  was  fitted  with  a  TV  monitoring  system  to  allow  both  the 
supervisor and coxswain to view deck operations. It was not clear to the crew what action should have been 
taken if any part of the system was inoperable. 

 

 

 

 

Showing mooring line caught on diver rescue davit in deployed position 

Showing tension created on the diver rescue davit by the entangled mooring line 

Showing block and tackle recovery device striking bulkhead 

 

 

 

  Revision of task plan to include the requirement to confirm all lines are released and the LDC is ready to depart 

 

Actions taken 

prior to sail away from the worksite; 

  Elimination of time limits for diver recovery drills; 

  Revision of diving contractors’ LDC operating checklists; 

  Procedures for disconnecting moorings revised to include a hold point to confirm the LDC is ready for transit; 

  Revision of LDC coxswain’s job description with a more detailed responsibility for management of LDC marine 

operations and what actions to take in the event of any equipment failure; 

  Revision  of  company  LDC  familiarisation  procedure  to  include  the  requirement  for  diver  rescue  drills  in 

sheltered waters as well as theoretical training when the majority of a dive team is changed out. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  High potential stored energy incident: Inner buoyancy module clamp failure during removal 

 

Lost time injury (LTI): Rigger struck by rigging under tension 

5  UK HSE: Worker Loses Fingers in Crush Injury During Lifting Operations 

The  UK  HSE  reports  that  a  company  has  been  sentenced  after  a  worker  lost  his  middle  two  fingers  at  work.  
The incident occurred whilst he was trying to repair a main entrance gate.  A guide roller on the underside of the 
gate had collapsed and two employees were tasked by their line manager to make the repair. 

What happened 

What went wrong/causes 

The two workers attached a four-leg lifting chain to a fork lift truck to lift the gate, which weighed in excess of 
400kg. However, the chains were too long, so they were adjusted using a shortening hook.  One of the men used 
the forklift to lift the gate approximately 45cm above the ground so that his colleague could access the guide roller 
on the underside. As he reached under to do so the chains slipped and the gate fell onto his hand.  He lost the ring 
finger and his middle finger up to the first knuckle on his right hand. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

The Health & Safety Executive inspector commented that this kind of injury was easily prevented: 
 

The risks should have been identified.  Those in control of work have a responsibility to devise safe methods of 
working  and  to  provide  the  necessary  information,  instruction  and  training  to  their  workers  in  those  safe 
methods along with effective supervision and monitoring. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Finger injury during maintenance work – Restricted work case 

 

Lost time injury (LTI): Finger injury whilst working in engine room 

  Finger injury during loading operations 

Please also watch IMCA’s short video Be prepared to work safely – watch your hands. 

 

6  US Coast Guard Safety Alert 07/17 – CO2 hazards 

During two recent vessel inspections Coast Guard marine inspectors participated in and witnessed occasions where 
the testing and maintenance of a CO2 system resulted in serious safety threats that could easily have led to loss of 
life. 

A chief mate and a Coast Guard inspector were testing the fire detection system.  The mate and inspector went to 
the vessel’s hydraulic equipment room and the mate stood on a spare parts box in order to apply a heat gun to the 
heat  actuator.  The  CO2  subsequently  discharged  directly  above  their  heads  and  filled  the  room.  The  mate  was 
overcome by the CO2 release and had to be revived by CPR after being pulled out of the space unconscious. 

The problem was that the mate directed the heat to a ‘heat actuator’ and not a ‘heat temperature transmitter’. 

The crew were unfamiliar with the vessel’s systems and had not referred to the associated manuals. 

Thus, their testing of the system was conducted without an understanding of the impacts of their actions, placing 
them and the Coast Guard inspectors at risk. 

Incident 1 

Incident 2 

A  certification  inspection  was  taking  place  while  technicians  were  working  on  the  CO2  system.    A  Coast  Guard 
inspector in the machinery space was told that CO2 technicians were going to release the CO2, which was not part 
of the planned inspection.  He was informed that the system became accidently primed for release when the pilot 
system was activated by a technician in training.  As the technician was reconnecting the cable-actuated release 
levers attached to the tops of the bottles, the activation cables remained connected to the levers. When the bottles 
were moved later in the servicing process, the cable tension increased to the point where the levers were lifted 
resulting in the release of charged bottles against a closed valve which prevented immediate release into the space. 

The  technicians  ultimately  decided  they  needed  to  release  the  entire  engine  room  CO2  system  to  remedy  the 
situation.  They communicated their intentions to the vessel’s engineers, who accounted for all vessel personnel in 
the space. However, their count was incorrect as they missed a Coast Guard inspector who was still in the engine 
room.  The inspector was found and left the engine room. 

As a result of inadequate accountability measures and poor understanding of, and communication of, the hazards 
involved, the safety of crew members and a Coast Guard inspector was placed at risk. 

The US Coast Guard writes: 
 

CO2 fire extinguishing systems present an inherent risk to the personnel involved with their inspection, testing, 
and maintenance.  Over the years the Coast Guard has become aware of multiple events where these systems 
have inadvertently released or leaked and caused the deaths of shipboard personnel, technicians and inspection 
personnel.  CO2 system inspection, testing, and maintenance require thoughtful planning and risk mitigation 
efforts to prevent such events from happening. 

The Coast Guard notes that both of these instances reflect a lack of knowledge and risk awareness by the persons 
involved. The Coast Guard strongly recommends that: 

  Only  persons  adequately  trained  and  properly  evaluated  be  permitted  to  participate  in  CO2  testing  and 

maintenance procedures on board vessels; 

  Every person involved must know and consider the resulting outcomes for each step of the testing procedure 

prior to it taking place; 

  Risks associated with CO2 and other systems should never be underestimated. Risk prevention activities should 
always lean towards providing the greatest safety margins for those involved including 100% accountability of 
all personnel aboard the vessel prior to conducting an operational test of a system. 

 

 

The Coast Guard has previously released CO2 related safety alerts. Safety Alert 15-14 recommends conducting a 
comprehensive  pre-test  meeting  and  simulated  step-by-step  ‘walk-through’  between  involved  parties  prior  to 
actual  testing  of  complex  or  potentially  confusing  systems.  Operational  controls  for  those  involved  should  be 
implemented  to  maximise  safety  and  reduce  risk.  Additionally,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  reminds  all  maritime 
operators  of  the  importance  in  performing  regular  vessel  specific  emergency  drills  and  to  ensure  that  all 
crewmembers have the proper knowledge, skills, and abilities to respond to any potential emergency. 

The alert can be found here. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Awareness: CO2 flooding system activation points 

 

 

