Safety Flash 

 June 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Hand Injuries, Burns 

This safety flash covers three lost time injuries (LTIs) in which crew have suffered injury to their fingers or hands.  
In the first, someone got his fingers trapped in a closing door when his overalls got caught.  In the second, there 
was an unplanned dropping of a heavy object – only a few centimetres but sufficient enough to injure a crewman’s 
fingers.  In the third, a crew member put a hand into a dryer to check if the garments were dry, and in doing so, 
touched a “base layer” type garment that had melted inside the machine.   

The fourth incident is an unusual and interesting case of flammable gas being released in a tubular structure, igniting 
and causing harm.  We move from there to news of another fuel spray fire – an area where constant vigilance is 
called for – and conclude with a report of damage to decks after caustic chemicals were not washed away properly.  

1 

LTI: Hand Injury Resulting from Clothing Catching on Door 

What happened? 

Crew were standing down from mooring stations after a vessel left  port.    One crewman was passing through a 
heavy door, when the left sleeve of his overalls got caught on the door locking slot in the door jamb.  Before he 
could free the sleeve, the closing door shut hard on his hand, causing injury to the ball of his thumb.  First aid was 
rendered on board immediately.  He was referred to the doctor ashore for further treatment and was advised to 
sign off for further treatment thereafter. 

 

 

 

 

 
What went wrong? 

 

Immediate causes identified were; 
  carelessness and lack of situational awareness – he did not safely pass the door frame resulting in coverall 

sleeve being snagged by the door jamb 

the cuff or sleeve of his overall was loose 

the door closing mechanism was not properly adjusted; 

 

 

  Causal factors: 

  management – inadequate work standards; the weekly inspection did not adequately identify the potential 

hazards of door closing mechanism and unsafe door jamb; 

  The root cause identified was that risks were considered tolerable – crew were using the door on a daily basis 
without observing and reporting the existence of the potential hazards, and wearing overalls with sleeves loose. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Hand injury during retrieval of personal protective equipment (PPE) stored inside a compressor unit  

  Near-miss: Drawstring on storm jacket nearly drawn into rotating equipment 

2 

LTI: Finger Injury During Pilot Ladder Preparation 

What happened? 

An Ordinary Seaman was injured while rigging the pilot ladder during arrival in port.  In preparation before rigging 
the  ladder,  a  floodlight  was  being  lowered  by  the  crewman.    He  inadvertently  dropped  the  light  bracket  while 
removing the locking pin, and it landed on his other hand, causing injury to the little finger.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The immediate cause was found to be that the injured person was not in the right position.  He misjudged the 
situation and used an improper technique to adjust the floodlight.    He tried to catch the  bracket  arm from 
falling, thinking it would damage the lamp; 

  The following causal factors were identified: 

  no-one foresaw the need for precautions in adjusting the flood light 
 

the crewman had limited knowledge the potential risk involved; 

  The root causes were found to be: 

risk was considered tolerable – this was a routine recurring task 

 

 

safety systems were inadequate – there was no properly designed handle to hold the light bracket in place 
while removing the securing pin. 

What were the actions? 

  Review of specific ship and task risk assessments to include potential risks involved in this operation; 

  More effective toolbox talks to be conducted for the crew involved; 

  More care to be taken when conducting routine work, especially when less experienced crew are involved. 

Members  may  wish  to  review  the  following  incidents,  all  of  which  cover  finger  injuries  following  unplanned 
movement of heavy equipment: 

  Finger injury during maintenance work – restricted work case; 

Lost time injury (LTI): Finger injury whilst working in engine room; 

Line of fire LTI: Finger injury during lifting operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

LTI: Burn to Hand While Working in Laundry 

 
3 

What happened? 

UK Step Change in Safety has published an alert in which a member of the 
crew suffered a burnt hand whilst working in the laundry.  The person put 
a  hand  into  a  dryer  (prior  to  running  the  cooling  cycle)  to  check  if  the 
garments were dry.  In doing so, that hand touched a “base layer” type 
garment that had melted inside the machine.  The result was a burn that 
escalated to an LTI. 

What lessons were learnt? 

Some work activities should be done in sequence to ensure safety (e.g. 
running  the  dryer  cooling  cycle  before  entering).    In  such  cases,  it  is 
necessary not only to know what the control measures are, but also to 
carry the work out in a particular order.  Users of offshore laundry facilities 
should make sure that clothing is appropriate for machine washing and 
drying.    Certain  fabrics  can  melt  under  high  heat,  increasing the risk  of 
injury to laundry workers and the possibility of fire. 

See  the  Step  Change  “Safety  Moment”  here.    Members  may  wish  to 
review the following incident: 

  Near-miss: Laundry fire hazards.  

This 

Base layer type garments are usually 
either a mix of or entirely made from 
polypropylene. 
fabric  has 
qualities  which  allow  moisture  to 
wick  away  and  heat  to  be  retained. 
Because  of  its  melting  factor,  air 
drying  is  recommended  instead  of 
machine drying. 

4 

 LTI: Crewman Burnt in Fire Following Release of Flammable Gas from Hand Rail 

What happened? 

A mechanic  was drilling a 3.5mm hole into the access stair handrail  of a  rescue 
craft, in order to install a safety barrier clip.  When the drill bit penetrated the wall 
of the handrail pipe, there was a release of an unknown flammable gas that caused 
a fire and subsequent injury.  He suffered burns which required recovery time in 
hospital and lost days from work.  

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The  design  of  the  handrail,  using/creating  hollow  and  enclosed  structures,  led  to  the  conditions  for 
accumulation of hazardous gas.  There were no design features to allow for venting.  The construction of the 

 

handrail (of low grade steel) contributed to the accumulation of a combination of hazardous gases in the hollow 
and enclosed structure; 

  The drilling introduced a heat source for ignition of the hazardous gases when released; 

  The mechanic was in the path/route of the hazardous gas release (line of fire), and was not wearing his personal 

protective equipment (PPE) with all fastenings secured, as was required. 

The Investigation team believes that the injured person was carrying a paper copy of the risk assessment for the 
job in – but sticking out of – his right side front pocket at the time of the incident.  It is believed that when it burned, 
an intensified heat spot was created which contributed to the degree of severity of the burns suffered. 

What lessons were learnt?   

  The  injured  person  and  his  supervisor  were  not  aware  of  the  presence  of  the  hazardous  gas;  as  such  the 

hazard/risk was not identified nor the risks reduced before starting the job; 

  Hazardous gas can be accumulated over time in hollow and enclosed structures.  Specific standards/procedures 

should be in place for work on such structures; 

  The risk assessment in place for this task did not address the potential presence of hazardous gas accumulation 

in a hollow and enclosed structure. 

What were the actions?  

  Handrail design should consider features/measures to limit or avoid the potential for accumulation of gases 
inside hollow and enclosed structures.  Examples include using angle irons for hand rails, non-metallic tubulars, 
weep or vent holes in tubulars, etc.; 

  Establish procedures to safely tap into a hollow and enclosed structure which potentially has hazardous gas 

inside; 

  PPE to be worn as designed, with all fastenings secured.   

The reporter notes that “alerts from at least 3 known previous incidents of similar nature in the E&P industry had 
not been seen prior to the incident. Sharing lessons learned is important and necessary for prevention of similar 
incidents.” 

See https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/UserFiles/works/pdfs/473.pdf for an article on the explosion hazard from 
hydrogen gas generation inside sealed frames. 

Members may also wish to review the following incidents: 

  Near-miss: Release of trapped pressure after ROV dive; 

 

LTI: Contact with Refrigerant Gas Causing Hand Injury.  

5 

Fuel Spray Fire - Déjà Vu: Prepare and Prevent it from Happening to You! 

The United States Coastguard (USCG) has published Marine Safety Alert 06-17 to bring attention to ‘yet another 
fuel spray fire’.  The USCG notes that “these types of incidents, involving fuel leakages contacting hot surfaces and 
igniting, happen too frequently and have been a focus of various marine safety organizations such as the IMO for 
many years.” 

What happened? 

On  a  194  GRT  offshore  supply  vessel  with  an  unmanned  engine  room,  a  main  engine  low  fuel  pressure  alarm 
occurred on the bridge, and was investigated by the crew.   

The crew member on watch entered the engine room and identified a high-pressure fuel leak spraying over and 
upon the port engine’s turbocharger.  He also reported a large quantity of diesel fuel in the bilge.  

 

 

 
The Master then went down into the engine room and witnessed the ignition of the fire.  Using a hand held portable 
fire extinguisher he quickly attempted to extinguish the fire without success.   The Master activated the general 
alarm, secured the hatches, had crew members secure the ventilation dampers and closed the remote fuel shut-
off valves to the engine room.  The fire then quickly self-extinguished.  No-one was harmed, but this engine room 
fire led to significant damage, operational down-time of the vessel and lost company revenues. 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The source of the fuel leak was identified to be a rupture on a flexible fuel hose connected to the fuel filter assembly.  
The USCG recommendations can be summarised thus: 

  Avoid an “out of sight, out of mind mentality” and regularly inspect unmanned machinery spaces; 

 

Inspect fuel and lubricating systems closely from source tanks to system end points; 

  Examine all heat sources particularly with respect to engine exhausts; 

  Minimize the use of non-metallic flexible hoses in systems carrying flammable liquids particularly around engine 

areas where failures leading to leakage or spray may find hot spots capable of igniting the fluids; 

Please refer to the fuller report and recommendations on the USCG website.  Members may wish to review the 
following incidents: 

  Fatalities: Engine room fire caused by fuel spray ignition; 

  Near miss: Fire hazard arising from failed fuel pipe connection. 

6  Chemical Spill Leads to Costly Deck Replacement   

What happened? 

The  USCG  has  published  Marine  Safety  Alert  01-17  relating  to  hazards 
from  chemical  spills.    USCG  inspectors  found  several  cracks  and  parted 
seams  in  the  aluminium  braces  of  the  structure  underneath  a  vessel’s 
cargo deck.  They learned that there had been a caustic soda spill on the 
deck.  While it was washed off the vessel with water, a diluted caustic soda 
and water mix seeped into and settled underneath the wood planking.  A 
chemical  reaction  then  occurred,  causing  damage  and  the  need  for 
extensive repairs. 

and 

oxidize 

Caustic Soda (Sodium Hydroxide, NaOH) is 
highly reactive with aluminium, causing it 
to 
quickly. 
Additionally, when caustic soda is exposed 
to aluminium under some conditions it can 
also  produce  highly  flammable  hydrogen 
gas.   

corrode 

As can be seen in this case, in addition to potential health risks to personnel involved with routine handling and 
clean-up of spills, there is also the potential for adverse chemical reactions with vessel components, construction 
materials, and other items on-board.  The full alert can be found on the USCG website. 

 

IMCA has published a pocket safety card entitled Hazardous substances safety guide.  Members may wish to refer 
to the following incidents: 

  Aluminium fresh water tanks: Near collapse due to serious corrosion;   

  Cargo contamination causing LTIs during clean-up. 

 

