AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/11 

Safety Flash 

 November 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Dropped Taut Wire Clump Weight 

A member has reported an incident in which a winch wire parted and a taut wire clump weight was dropped onto the seabed 
during diving operations.  The incident occurred when a vessel was engaged in flow line flushing.  Owing to a change in wind 
direction and a forecast of poor weather, it had been agreed to alter the heading of the vessel. 

At  the  time  of  the  incident  two  divers  were  in  the  water  and  positioned  aft  and  to  starboard  of  the  diving  bell,  and  the 
starboard taut wire was deployed and active as a dynamic positioning (DP) reference.  Just before the heading alteration the 
starboard  clump  weight  was  lifted  20m  clear  of  the  seabed  and  closely  monitored  by  remotely  operated  vehicles  (ROVs).  
The heading alteration was carried out and the ROV inspected the seabed where the starboard clump weight would land, to 
check  it  was  clear  to  land  back  on  the  seabed.    The  seabed  at  this  location  was  not  clear  and  therefore  the  decision  was 
made  to  deploy  the  port  taut  wire  instead,  because  the  seabed  on  the  port  side  appeared  to  be  clear  of  obstruction.  
The port clump weight was lowered to 100m above the seabed, in preparation for landing. 

The  ROV  continued  to  monitor  the  starboard  clump  weight  and  identified  an  area  under  it  suitable  for  landing.  
The starboard  taut  wire  was  then  deployed  and  taken  back  into  the  DP  system,  and  the  port  taut  wire  and  clump weight 
recovered to the surface.  During recovery, as the port taut wire was being slewed inboard, the wire parted and the clump 
weight  (315kg)  fell  straight  downward,  well  away  from  the  divers  working  on  the  seabed,  and  landed  clear  of  any  subsea 
assets. 

 

 

Clump weights landed on seabed 

An investigation revealed the following: 

  A worn wire guide with sharp edges caused unnoticed damage to the taut wire, resulting in the wire parting; 

  Procedures for protecting divers and subsea assets from dropped objects were properly followed and this prevented a 

potentially much more serious incident. 

The following preventative actions were taken: 

  The existing starboard taut wire was replaced in its entirety in case further damage had been sustained; 

  The damaged wire guide was assessed and temporary repairs were undertaken.  A complete new unit would be fitted at 

the next opportunity (dry dock); 

  There would be a review of relevant inspection and maintenance routines. 

 
The following lessons were learnt: 

  The 30° dropped object cone employed during the deployment and recovery of loads to and from the surface ensured 

that the divers were not in a location where they may have been struck by the falling clump weight; 

  Loads falling out of control through the water column have a tendency to deviate from a vertical fall.  Depending on the 
shape of the falling load, the water depth, and currents and tides, they can land within a dropped object cone of between 
6° and 30° from the vertical; 

  Tubular loads have a tendency to deviate even further from the vertical, up to 45°; 

  The oversight and checking (by ROV) of the clump weight landing locations prevented any potential damage to subsea 

infrastructure; 

  Taut  wires  are  normally  lowered  from  the  surface  at  the  start  of  DP  operations  before  diving  operations  start,  and 
recovered to surface after diving and DP operations come to an end.   When recovering them to surface during diving 
operations they should be treated as potential dropped objects which can affect divers, and divers should be clear of the 
area at these times. 

2  LTI: Thumb Injury 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  member of  the  crew  sustained  a  lost time  injury  (LTI)  to  his  thumb.    The 
incident occurred when a vessel’s marine engineering team was conducting a water leak repair on part of one of the main 
engines during a vessel transit.  The repair involved the removal of the piston and connecting rod arrangement, as well as the 
removal  of  the  cylinder  liner,  to  allow  for  cleaning  and  re-sealing.    Whilst  removing  the  piston  and  connecting  rod,  the 
injured person had his hands inside the engine crank case to stabilise the bottom of the connecting rod and prevent it causing 
damage as it passed the bottom of the cylinder liner. 

The  removal  of  the  piston  was  accomplished  using  a  1Te  chain  block  attached  to  the  piston  crown.    At  this  stage  of  the 
operation, the injured person was on the starboard side of the engine and all the other team members were on the port side 
with various other duties.  Communication was by means of hand signals: owing to the high noise levels in the engine room, 
clear verbal communication was not possible. 

As  another  crew  member  started  hauling  up  on  the  chain  block,  lifting  the  piston  and  connecting  rod,  the  injured  person 
found his left thumb trapped between the bottom of the cylinder liner and the bottom of the connecting rod.   He motioned 
with his free hand to lower the load which allowed his injured thumb to be released.  He then reported to the medic where, 
following a medical examination, he was subsequently medevaced ashore. 

Although this task was not viewed as routine maintenance, it had taken place many times before.  The team consisted of four 
experienced members including the 2nd  engineer, a rating and two fitters.   The injured person was the supervisor for the 
shift during the maintenance task.   A permit to work (PTW) and risk assessment had been completed for this task and all 
crew members involved had been present for the toolbox talk before it was started. 

 

 

Position of the injured person at the time of the incident (re-enactment) 

 
Following investigation, the company identified the following causes: 

  Lack of organisation 

–  This meant that the injured person was the supervisor but also ended up taking a hands-on role in the operation.  
As  the  injured  party  was  the  team  leader,  and  also  taking  a  key  part  in  the  operation,  this  reduced  the  level  of 
co-ordination of the task and its associated hazards; 

  Lack of hazard awareness and risk perception 

–  Though  existing  controls  and  safety  management  systems  were  followed,  they  failed  to  identify  and  allow  clear 

communication of the potential hazards involved in this operation 

–  The risk assessment did not readily recognise the potential for pinch points or dropped loads during this task; 

  Poor communication in noisy engine room environment 

–  Control and co-ordination of the task was reduced due to the difficulty in clear communication 
–  This lack of control and co-ordination during the operation allowed the load to be moved while the injured person 

–  The crew member controlling the load by means of the chain block had no clear line of sight to the injured person 

had his hands on the connecting rod 

whose  hands were inside the engine; 

 

Incorrect positioning of hands 
–  The injured person’s thumb was in the pinch point during movement of the load. 

The following actions were taken: 

  Review  relevant  task  related  risk  assessments  to  ensure  all  associated  and  potential  hazards  are  clearly  identified  and 

  Ensure all lifting equipment is correctly rated and inspected for the intended task prior to use; 

  Communicate the importance of toolbox talks and safe working practices to ensure key hazards are identified, discussed 

recorded; 

and addressed. 

3  Near Miss: Winch Wire Parted and Crane Block Dropped into Small Boat 

A member  has reported an incident in which a crane winch wire parted and caused a  crane block to fall 13m into a small 
boat.    The  incident  occurred  during  the  recovery  of  a  small  boat  used  by  divers.    When  the  small  boat  had  been  lifted 
approximately 0.5m above the water, the winch wire parted approximately 13m from its working end (the end made fast to 
the head of the jib).  As a result, the block fell down into the boat and missed a crewman by a metre or so.  There were no 
injuries or damage.  However, this near miss incident can be regarded as potentially catastrophic. 

Crane block landed in small boat 

Parted winch wire 

 

 

An investigation revealed the following: 

absence of a thorough inspection regime. 

  The winch or fall wire parted approximately 13m from its (working) end due to lack of appropriate maintenance and the 

 
The following lessons were drawn from the incident: 

  Personnel should not be in small boats during launch and recovery; 

  There is no substitute for thorough and exhaustive maintenance and inspection regimes, especially those pertaining  to 

lifting equipment; 

 

Insufficient attention and importance had been given to the condition of a wire which  was regularly (partially) lowered 
into the sea during routine operations. 

The following recommendations were made: 

 

If wires are required to be lowered into the water, then those lengths of wire which have been submerged should be 
thoroughly washed with fresh water (‘freshed-off’) on a daily basis after completion of work; 

  A  review  of  the  type  of  grease/protective  coating  applied  to  the  wires  should  be  undertaken  in  order  to  confirm  its 
suitability  for  protection  of  wires  which  become  submerged  on  routine  basis  (reference  to  the  crane  manufacturer’s 
manual might be of value in this regard); 

  Additional  inspection  regimes  should  be  considered  to  allow  for  the  fact  that  parts  of  the  fall  wire  are  exposed  to 

complete submersion from time to time; 

  Personnel should not be in the small boat at the time of lowering or recovery, unless it is absolutely essential and then 

only providing suitable and stringent control measures have been put in place. 

4  Fall Protection Product Recall 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  Safety  Flash  11-35  regarding  the  recall  of  certain  fall  protection  products  by  3M.  
The products recalled are the G-Series retractable lanyards. 

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//notices/msf-safety-flash-11.35.pdf 

The  manufacturer’s  original  product  recall  upon  which 
www.3m.com/FallProtection 

the  MSF  safety 

flash 

is  based  can  be 

found  at 

5  Failure of Rescue Boat Release Mechanism 

The Marine Safety Forum has published Safety Flash 11-36 regarding the failure of a rescue boat release mechanism.  During a 
routine launch of the rescue boat whilst at sea, the painter released early causing the towing forces normally absorbed by the 
painter to shift onto the fall wire once the boat was waterborne.   This resulted in the rescue boat capsizing.  It is possible 
that the early release of the painter was due to a failure in the painter release mechanism. 

Further investigation is ongoing. 

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.36.pdf 

6  Person Injured by Parts Ejected Under Pressure 

The  US  Department  of  the  Interior  Bureau  of  Ocean  Energy  Management,  Regulation  and  Enforcement  (BOEMRE)  has 
published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  the  rupture  of  a  water  pressure  tank  bladder.    An  employee  suffered  facial 
injuries when a fitting he was removing was ejected under pressure. 

Further information can be found from www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_297.pdf 

7  Fatal Diving Incident 

The Danish Maritime Authority Investigation Board has produced a report regarding a recent fatality which occurred during 
diving  operations.    The  fatality  occurred  when  a  diver  was  working  underwater  at  approximately  41  metres,  and  his  air 
supply was cut off due to an unintended squeezing of his umbilical. 

Further information is available at www.dmaib.com/Ulykkesrapporter/MAERSK_TENDER_24072010.pdf  

