AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/06 

December 2006 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  DP Run-Off Incident – Class 2 DP Vessel 

IMCA  has  received  a  report  of  a  DP  run-off  caused by  operational  changes  to  the DP  system  which  led  to  the loss  of  all 
reference systems.  The DP class 2 vessel was alongside a platform and suffered a loss of reference systems, requiring the 
vessel  to  be  taken  into  manual  control.    The  vessel  was  recovered  to  a  safe  location  without  mishap.    No  damage  was 
incurred to the platform or the vessel. 

An initiating cause was the deterioration of the performance of one of the position reference systems. The DP operator on 
watch  selected  alternative  reference  systems  to  maintain  DP  positional  integrity,  in  accordance  with  normal  accepted 
procedures, whilst the problems with the deteriorating reference system were addressed. 

The configuration of the vessel linked the faulty reference system with a number of other reference systems, with the result 
that the loss of one system caused the loss of others, including a vertical reference system (VRS).  

The voting algorithm in the DP system was based on three VRS units, rather than two VRS units, as actually installed onboard 
the vessel.  This caused the  second VRS to be rejected by the DP system, with the secondary effect that all other reference 
systems were also rejected. 

In addition, sensor offsets to the centre of gravity had been omitted, which caused erroneous calculations of movement, and 
errors in wiring compensating the pitch had occurred either at commissioning of the vessel or during maintenance of the DP 
system.  This caused pitch motions to be amplified rather than compensated.  There was insufficient documentation of these 
wiring changes onboard the vessel. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  errors  could  normally  have  been  picked  up  during  commissioning  or  annual  FMEA  DP  trials, 
provided that the FMEA trial was not carried out in calm water, where the corrections for the vessel’s movements would 
have been too small to be distinguished.  However, since FMEA trials test function and not configuration, the potential for 
error could remain undetected in the system. 

Further, it should be noted that records of all system configurations, offsets, drawings, changes etc should be held onboard 
the vessel, and kept up to date. 

The following actions were proposed: 

i)  DP reference inputs should be correctly selected to mitigate loss; 

ii)  DP system configuration should be checked, as every vessel is different; 

iii)  All  DP  issues  should  be  documented,  together  with  the  close-out  issues,  to  aid  the  DP  maintenance  engineers  as 

required; 

through failure of those systems. 

iv)  Configuration of individual reference systems should be modified such that VRS units cannot be inadvertently affected 

2  Near-Miss:  Divers Nearly Hit by Weight on Taut Wire  

IMCA has received a report of a near-miss incident wherein a taut wire weight narrowly missed two divers before coming to 
rest next to a subsea structure.  There was no injury to the divers nor damage to the structure. 

Safety Flash 

 

In  undertaking  its  work,  the  DP  vessel  had  moved,  resulting  in  the  taut  wire  running  above  the  divers  and  the  subsea 
structure.  The dive was being run by a trainee diving supervisor under the direction of an experienced diving supervisor.  
The  DP  operator  (DPO)  was  a  deck  officer  experienced  in  DP  operations.    Communications  were  through  an  open 
communication system between the bridge and dive control. 

The divers were in the process of recovering tools to clear the worksite prior to relocation of the vessel.  Bridge and dive 
control had agreed that the vessel would need to move to re-plumb the taut wire prior to recovery.  Dive control stated 
that  a  move  of  approximately  15 metres was  required to  re-plumb the  taut  wire.   The  vessel  moved  5m,  after which  the 
DPO announced that he was “going to lift port taut wire”, believing that the taut wire weight could be recovered clear of the 
divers and the subsea structure.  At the end of this announcement from the bridge the trainee diving supervisor said “OK” 
on the open communications channel, but in response to another conversation.  The DPO on the bridge interpreted this as 
an okay to lift the taut wire.  The experienced diving supervisor immediately called an ‘all stop’.  However, the lift had already 
commenced and although the bridge stopped the lift there had been nine seconds of lifting, which was sufficient for the taut 
wire weight to swing towards the subsea structure and the divers. 

The investigation identified the following two main causal factors: 

  There was a failure in communication protocol between the bridge and the dive control; 

  Although  the DP  operator was  experienced,  he  was  experienced in DP  operations  on  lay  vessels  rather than  on  dive 

support vessel. 

The following remedial actions were recommended: 

  Reinforcement  of  correct  “repeat  back”  protocols  to  be  carried  out.    “OK”  is  not  a  sufficient  response  to  a  critical 
operational  question.    The  correct  response  should  include  confirmation  that  the  “OK”  is  in  relation  to  the  question 
asked, e.g. “OK to lift the taut wire” or “OK to move vessel”; 

  Review  of  the  familiarisation  process  to  identify  gaps  in  knowledge  when  personnel  are  relocated  from  one  area  of 

operations to another; 

IMCA M 175 – Guidance on Operational Communications, Part 1 – Bridge & Dive Control – contains useful references to 
publications regarding correct radio procedure. 

