AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/11 

October 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of Pressure Washer  

A member has reported an incident in which a Karcher HDS1195 pressure washer failed when a technician was conducting a 
test run after maintenance.  The model involved was a portable unit designed for domestic and industrial use, and was three 
years old.  A technician had completed the replacement of an electrical switch, and was checking that the switch was working 
correctly.  On successful completion of the tests, the unit was powered up to ensure it was fully operational.  The technician 
saw water emerging from the nozzle of the cleaning gun, and proceeded to shut down power to the washer.  As this was 
done, there was a loud bang and the hatch for the boiler was blown off into the air.  The technician received two small cuts 
to the face and minor droplet burns to the right arm. 

Following investigation, the following was revealed: 

  A pressure relief valve, designed to prevent system overpressure, was found to be corroded and unserviceable; 

  A switch, designed to regulate the boiler, was also found to be defective.  As a result, overpressure within the system 

caused the heating coil to rupture, and the escaping water and steam blew the hatch off the boiler unit and into the air. 

The following recommendations were: 

  A thorough inspection of similar portable pressure washing devices, particularly those using a heating system, would be 

  Portable pressure washing devices should be part of the planned maintenance schedule. 

beneficial; 

 

Pressure washer with boiler hatch missing 

 

 

 

 

 
2  Equipment Damage – Dropped ROV/Tether Management System (TMS) 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  ROV  was  dropped  to  the  deck  from  between  1.5m  (metres)  and  2.0m, 
resulting in significant damage. The work-class ROV was being launched via the launch and recovery system (LARS) A-frame 
when the LARS operator failed to recognise that both latches were not engaged. Visual inspection had only been conducted 
on the aft latch. The umbilical was not managed effectively resulting in unnecessary slack which allowed the system to fall the 
1.5-2m to deck. 

The following corrective actions were taken and a number of recommendations were made: 

  As an interim measure, an audible alarm indicator was installed to confirm and notify that the latch mechanism has been 

 

engaged. This alarm sounds for 7 seconds; 

  Markers were painted on each latch to clearly identify the latch position; 

  Cameras were installed to view the latch position;  

  Additional communication checks were implemented and recorded;  

  Task job safety analysis (JSA) was updated to reflect additional control requirements.  

The following further preventative actions were undertaken: 

  An engineering review of this particular system to include development of an interlock system that would prevent over 

boarding or recovery of ROV unless the latch mechanism was engaged; 

  An  engineering  review  of  all  ROV  LARS  operations  within  the  company  to  identify  opportunity  for  improvement  and 

potential hazard impacts.  

   

 

 

 

 

 
3  Grinding Disc with Defects 

A member has reported an incident in which a welder discovered a defect in a new grinding disc. When grinding, the defect 
could have resulted in the disc cracking  leading to possible serious injury or damage. The defect seemed to be a disc steel 
inner ring that had melted into the disc during fabrication. 

It  was  noted  that  safe  grinding  starts  and  ends  with  a  visual  inspection  of  the  grinding  equipment.  The  welder  followed 
recommended process and identified a defective disc before it was used.  

 

Iron ring melted into the disc 

 

 

 

 

 

Top side of grinding disc with no marks of defect 

4  Gas Detector Safety Alert 

The UK Health and Safety Executive (HSE)  has issued an alert relating to gas detectors, following investigations by the UK 
HSE  into  the  Status  Scientific  Controls  portable  gas  detector  type  Mentor  PGD2.    It  has  been  discovered  that  in  certain 
circumstances these instruments could continue to remain active when there is insufficient battery power for them to work 
accurately. 

Further information can be found from www.hse.gov.uk/safetybulletins/gasdetectors.htm  

 

 
5  Collision Between OSV and Barge  

The Australian Transport Safety Board (ASTB) has published a report into a collision in port between an OSV and a barge. 
Both vessels suffered minor damage as a result of the collision but there were no injuries or pollution. 

Further information can be found from www.atsb.gov.au/media/3442445/mo2010006.pdf 

6  Oil Spill in Port whilst Discharging Waste Oil    

The Marine Safety Forum has published  Safety Flash 11-26 (attached) regarding an oil spill in port which occurred whilst a 
vessel  was  discharging  waste  oil.  The  root  causes  of  the  incident  were  considered  to  be  a  failure  to  follow  established 
procedures.  

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.26.pdf  

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
7  Fire Extinguisher Recall – Faulty Equipment 

The Marine Safety Forum has published Safety Flash 11-27 (attached) regarding faulty fire extinguisher equipment.   

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.27.pdf. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
8  Pilot Ladder Failure 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  Safety  Flash  11-29  (attached)  regarding  a  recent  incident  in  which  a  pilot  ladder 
parted whilst the pilot was attempting to board the vessel by means of this ladder. The pilot fell backwards onto the deck of 
the pilot boat and suffered injuries as a result.   

Further information can be found from: www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.29.pdf. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Safety Flash 

 

