AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 18/15 

Safety Flash 

  November 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com. 

Any actions,  lessons learnt, recommendations  and suggestions  in  IMCA Safety  Flashes  are generated  by  the submitting  organisation.  IMCA  Safety  Flashes 
provide in good faith safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  Small Change to the Disclaimer for all Safety Flashes 

It has been bought to IMCA’s attention that a number of members have been required by their client to make changes to their 
operations, or to undertake additional activity on the basis of information published in IMCA safety flashes.  

In general, the editorial content within the IMCA safety flashes is kept to a minimum.  The text, whilst it may be amended to 
ensure it is brief, informative and readable, remains as far as is reasonably practicable, with the main text being supplied by the 
submitting organisation.  

Therefore, any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations or suggestions in IMCA safety flashes are generated by the submitting 
organisation,  rather  than  by  IMCA  itself.    IMCA  safety  flashes  provide,  in  good  faith,  safety  information  for  the  benefit  of 
members, and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the Association or its members. 

The remainder of the events in this safety flash focus on diving related incidents. 

2  Maintenance of Automatic External Defibrillators (AED) 

During a recent audit, a member discovered significant non-conformances pertaining to the storage and maintenance of AED.  
The  consequences  were  potentially  significant,  and  immediate  re-assessment  was  undertaken  of  all  such  equipment  at  that 
members’ dive sites.  AEDs should be available for immediate usage. 

Our members’ audit process noted the following non-conformances:  

 

 

The battery had been removed or had been fitted incorrectly to the 
device. This was contrary to advice in the user manual for the item. 

The pads on the AED were out of date; 

 

Our  member  considers  this  to  be  a  significant  issue.  Inspection  of  other  sites  revealed  that  in  some  cases  batteries  were 
removed or detached from the units.  Removing or detaching the batteries from these units will prevent the unit being used 
for an additional sixty seconds, and lessens the chances of survival for the patient.  

Our member took the following actions: 

 
  Confirmed that the battery was fitted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions;  

  Confirmed that all equipment associated with the AED was “in-date”; 

  Tested the readiness of AED in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions; 

  Appropriately trained personnel conducted a familiarization session on use of the AED with all of the crew;  

  Ensured that the maintenance of the AED was added to the appropriate planned maintenance system.  

3  Three Incidences of Decompression Illness (DCI) 

A member has reported three instances of decompression illness on the same diving project.  The dives were to a depth of 
40m in June in temperate waters.  Water temperature at the seabed was 5 ºC and 9 ºC at the surface: 

  Diver A experienced a DCI in his left lower arm (muscle); 

  Diver B experienced a DCI in his left knee and right shoulder (joints); 

  Diver C experienced a DCI on his right shoulder/ upper arm (skin). 

Our members’ investigation noted the following:  

 

Initial checks of the DCI cases didn’t reveal any signs of procedural or material failures; 

  The three divers underwent additional examinations by the diving doctor with the focus on: 

Personal build of the individuals including measurements (length, width, circumference and weight); 

 

 

Fat percentages; 

  Use of dietary supplements.  

  These examinations showed  that these divers had quite normal fat percentages (13-25%) and that they were quite  fit.  

Additional examinations did not reveal any indicators that could predict a higher risk to DCIs. 

  There were no notable findings with regard to sleeping, eating (including use of supplements), drinking and sporting habits;  

  No abnormalities during the deck decompression were noted. 

What came to light was the relationship between the water temperature and in-water decompression and clothing:  

 

In all the three incidents the divers noted the water temperature was low;  

  One diver explained the temperature was much lower than experienced last year in the same location around the same 

  Whereas last year the divers were able to work with normal gloves, this year they used the thicker versions to reduce the 

time of the year;  

cooling down of the hands. 

Diver A reported that he used normal gloves in his first dive.  As his hands got cold he decided to use his own ‘long-sleeve’ 
gloves.  He used the same gloves on the previous project, where he already suffered from “sour” underarms as these gloves 
were quite tight (as they were older).  

Diver B reported that he was working quite hard to handle a tirfor tackle.  He explained that he was sweating quite a lot, part 
of  the  time  he  was  working  on  his  knee,  and  he  felt  really  cold  during  the  in-water  stops.    When  asked  what  kind  of 
undergarment he was wearing, he explained a t-shirt, thin fleece jacket and sports trousers (track suit). 

Diver C reported that he was working quite hard to move gravel bags around. He explained he was sweating quite a lot, but 
didn’t feel cold.  He further explained that for him it was quite normal to still feel comfortable, even though his skin had become 
cold.  When asking what kind of undergarment he was wearing, he explained a long-sleeve thermal shirt (normal synthetic 
type) and a summer-type under-suit. 

After  comparison  of  the  combination  of  dry-suit  undergarments  divers  B  and  C  were  wearing,  including  consulting 
manufacturer’s  recommendations,  it  was  concluded  that  they  were  insufficiently  dressed  for  the  temperature 
conditions.  

The lessons learnt: 

  Diver A’s long sleeved gloves were too tight; 

  Divers B and C were using undergarments insufficient for the conditions of the dive. 

 
The following actions were recommended: 

  Divers should wear correct and sufficient clothing for the dives they are going to make  – in terms of duration, type of 
work, and sea water temperature.  This should include sizing (garments should be properly fitted) and insulation properties 
(under-suits that are made of suitable materials in view of compression, moisture absorption and thermal properties): 

  Supervisors should consider restriction or adjustment of the dive profile (e.g. reduce bottom time and/or tasks) if a diver 

does not have the possibility to wear the appropriate clothing, so that increased risk of DCI is avoided. 

For reference, here is a table outlining the divers clothing on this dive: 

  
Dry-Suit 
  
Undergarment 

Diver A 

Northern Diver Origin 

Diver B 
Bare CD4 

Diver C 

Bare D6 Pro 

6,5mm XO grade neoprene 
Inner suit (Subgear Subtech 

3,5mm compressed neoprene 
T-shirt, Fleece jacket, Training 

100) 

pants 

6mm compressed neoprene 

Thermal shirt (long sleeves, synthetic) 

and inner suit (summer type) 

 

 

 

Manufacturer's 
Recommendations 

Metalux Temperature Undersuit 

SB Mid Layer Vest + CT200 (inner 

SB Mid Layer Vest + CT200 

(100gsm/200gsm) 

suit - 210gsm) 

(inner suit - 210gsm) 

 

 

 

Reference Summer 

Reference Winter 

Northern Diver SD71/SD74 

Northern Diver Flectalon 100 

Reference Cold Winter (2-part) 
Fourth Element Xerotherm Arctic 

 

  

 
 

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

 
 

 

 

Wound 

 
Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: DCI, diver): 

IMCA SF 04/04 – Incident 3 Late onset of decompression illness (DCI); 

IMCA SF 05/14 – Incident 1 Decompression illness (DCI) incident during routine decompression of divers from saturation.  

4  Lost  Time Injury  (LTI)  Following Stored  Energy  Release  and  Subsequent  Serious Infection of 

A member has reported an incident in which a diver was injured subsea whilst disconnecting a flange on a damaged flexible 
pipe.  The incident had occurred after the diver had removed all but four of the bolts and nuts and was in the process of 
removing the last four bolts.  He was in the process of sending the removed bolts and nuts up to the surface via the messenger 
line on the down line, when he heard a loud bang and was then struck in the leg by the flange, which had unexpectedly parted 
from the opposing flange.  There had been no indication during the disconnection that the flanges were parting. 

The diver sustained  a wound on his right leg just below the knee and was safely recovered to the vessel  and immediately 
treated on board.  As a precaution, he was transferred to a nearby fixed platform, for further medical treatment and helicopter 
transfer to a shore side hospital, where he remained overnight. 

Though he received initial treatment including antibiotics to stabilize the injury, following a short period in the hospital, the 
wound received became more seriously infected with gangrene.  The injured person was repatriated to a hospital in his home 
country where in due course he made a full recovery. 

Our member noted the following: 

  All pre-dive procedures were conducted properly; there was a dive plan, a risk assessment and a toolbox talk held; 

  The diver reported that nothing seemed out of the ordinary during the dive, and that the operation was a normal flange 

disconnection. 

Our member drew the following lessons from the incident: 

  The importance of stored energy / body positioning during diving operations -  it was concluded that the risk 
assessment for this type of connection was insufficient in the area of engineering and stress analysis, and that preventative 
measures to be considered may include tensioned tie backs, or actually releasing possible stored energy through a series 
of cuts along the pipe; 

  The  importance  of  proper  wound  aftercare  immediately  following  diver  recovery,  and  the  dangers  and 
potential severity of infection in skin-breaking injuries, no  matter the size or severity of the wound.    This is especially 
important in diving operations in inshore or tropical waters; 

  Also while appropriate aftercare was administered, a more aggressive antibiotic approach should have been taken.  Further 
awareness and education about microbial agents in the water, and the ways to identify and treat possible infections, should 
be made available to health professionals. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: wound, infection): 

IMCA SF 03/05 – Incident 13 MRSA (the ‘Super Bug’) and appropriate use of antibiotics; 

IMCA SF 01/12 – Incident 2 Lost time incident (LTI) – laceration to finger 

  

 

 

 

