Safety Flash 

 September 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 23/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

What happened? 

1  Property Damage: Platform Supply Vessel Collided with Legs of Jack-Up Rig 

A Platform Supply Vessel (PSV) collided with the legs of a jack-up drilling rig, causing some damage to the PSV.  The 
incident occurred after transfer of water to the rig. The PSV had been ready to disconnect the hose, but the rig 
informed the PSV that there would be a delay.  The PSV was to the windward (weather) side of the rig and the 
weather was “rough”, with the wind approximately 22 knots. 

A little under an hour after completing transfer of cargo, but whilst the hose was still connected, the PSV starboard 
engine  and  thrusters  tripped.    As  a  result  the  PSV  started  to  moved  astern  and  to  Starboard.    DP  control  was 
immediately transferred to manual mode. The hose was dropped in the water.  Whilst pulling away to safety, the 
PSV made contact with the forward leg of the drilling rig.  

Dent in PSV as a result of collision 

Damaged fuel oil pump 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

receive water on the lee side; 

  Procedures were not followed: Vessel working on the weather side as the jack-up rig was not geared up to 

  Equipment: Mechanical seal of fuel oil pump was damaged suddenly indicating material failure. 

What lessons were learnt?  What actions were taken? 

  Better management and assessment of risk during simultaneous operations  –  if required, the vessel should 

come off and get out of the safety zone; 

 

 

 
  Whilst  material  failure  of  items  can  be  unpredictable,  planned  maintenance  schedules  and  manufacturer’s 

instructions should be followed for critical equipment.  

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Collision Between Crew Boat And Anchored Barge; 

  Vessel Activities Near Platforms – Two Incidents. 

2 

Two Near Misses: Loads Fell from Height to Deck 

What happened? 

During two recent lifting operations, loads fell from height to the deck.  In one case the rigging crew were close to 
where the load landed – the incident could easily have had fatal results.  No one was hurt in either incident. 

 

What lessons were learnt? 

Investigation into both incidents showed that unapproved changes had been made to the rigging.  This was 
highlighted as a major contributing factor to the loads being dropped.   

It was found that the Management of Change (MOC) process had not been followed and that the crews had a 
lack of awareness regarding the application of the MOC process and when it should be applied.  

  The  company’s  MOC  process  was  not  followed;  the  changes  were  made  without  engineering  reviews  and 

subsequent risk assessments.   

 

If the MOC process had been applied, then the subsequent checks could have prevented both incidents. 

What actions were taken? 

ROV hooks for example); 

  Conduct a review to ensure that there are no unauthorised modifications to rigging or equipment (welding on 

  Equipment found to have been modified without engineering review or where the MOC process has not been 
followed, should be quarantined and not used until the MOC process and a risk assessment can be completed 
and approved; 

  Particular  care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  modifications  do  not  introduce  further  new  hazards  to  the 

operations; 

  Ensure that the MOC process is fully understood and applied across all worksites. 

 

 

 

 
Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Near-Miss: Modification Of Machinery; 

  Welding Of Shackles [“in spite of clear work instructions and procedures to the contrary, shackles and hooks at 

the worksite were being regularly modified by welding”]; 

  Dangerous  Occurrence  Involving  A  Mobile  Crane  [overload  protection  mechanism  on  the  crane  had  been 

deactivated]. 

3 

Failure of Pipework in Fuel Tanks 

What happened? 

Water  ingress  into  a  fuel  tank  was  discovered  to  be  from 
leaking pipework.  Water ingress was reported into a fuel tank 
from two seawater lines running through the tank.  Engineers 
investigating  a  high-level  alarm  on  the  fuel  tank  initially 
thought it was due to vessel movement.  But upon inspection 
of  the  pipework,  a  leak  was  found  on  a  sea  water  pipe 
approximately  150mm  outboard  from  the  Pump  Room 
bulkhead. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

There was a hole of around 13mm diameter in the pipe, which had caused seawater leakage into the tank and thus, 
a  rise  in  level.    Fuel  was  transferred  from  this  tank  to  the  port  side  settling  tank  and  shortly  after  starting  the 
transfer, the port side fuel separator tripped out. The 3rd engineer went to clean the strainer and quickly realised 
that a large amount of water was present in the system.  A check on the settling tank drain confirmed that there 
was water present. 

The cause was failure of pipework installed on the vessel at build stage. 

What lessons were learnt?  What actions were taken? 

  Clarification of fuel tanks on vessels if pipework lengths run through tanks; 

 

Inspection of pipework in tanks for integrity through visual and ultrasonic thickness baseline measurements. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Huge Leak Discovered In Fresh Water System. 

On the IMCA website, entering corrosion into the safety flash page search bar generates 60 results which members 
may wish to check for themselves. 

 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI) – Finger Laceration Due to Use of Knife 

 
4 

What happened? 

A crew member was working with a knife when his knife suddenly slipped 
and sliced a layer of skin off his index finger and part of the nail off the 
next finger on his left hand.  

Medical  treatment  was  received  on  return  to  port,  and  two  weeks  off 
work were necessary to recover from the injury. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The crew member was cutting towards his free hand; 

  He was wearing ANSI Level 4 cut resistant gloves at the time;   

  The cause was incorrect cutting technique. 

What lessons were learnt?  What actions were taken? 

The UK HSE produce a handy leaflet on How to reduce hand knife injuries.  

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Severed Tendon. 

5  Crewman got Cement Dust in his Eyes 

What happened? 

Always  keep  your  free  hand  (and  other  body  parts)  away  from  the  line  of  the  cut.    Gloves  provide  sufficient 
protection for regular cuts and grazes, however will not prevent a serious knife wound.  

During the discharging of a cement tank on board a vessel, a crewman 
was standing in the path of a blow back of cement dust, and the dust 
got in his eyes.  Crew were using a portable hose to investigate why the 
discharge line inside the tank was blocked.  The hose was being held 
by deckhands who were assisting in the operation.  There was a back 
pressure in the hose which resulted in the cement in the line and in the 
tank to blow back at considerable pressure.  A deck hand who was standing in the vicinity was caught unawares 
and got cement dust in his eyes. 

After washing out his eyes, the deck hand was unharmed. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The crew were not following the correct procedures for this work; 

  The crew were not wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE). 

What lessons were learnt?  What actions were taken? 

Proper precautions should be taken with dry bulk cargo and dusts of all kinds.  

Members may wish to consult  Carrying solid bulk cargoes safely, guidance for crews based on the International 
Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes Code. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Working with hoses and pressure. 

 

