AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/16 

Safety Flash 

  April 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1 

Fatality – Crew Member Struck By Forklift during Quayside Operations 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crew  member  was  struck  by  a  forklift  truck  during  quayside 
operations,  and  suffered  fatal  injuries.    The  incident  happened  when  a  vessel  crew  member  was  tasked  with 
unloading stores from a container on the quayside.  He descended the vessel gangway and headed towards the 
containers situated close by.  It was during this short excursion that the crew member was struck by a forklift and 
fatally injured.  

The investigation is still ongoing, but initial findings have indicated the following as possible contributory factors: 

  Blind spots within the forklift operators field of view from the operating cab; 

  Obscured vision due to sunlight. 

A mock-up showing the forklift operator’s field of view, as impaired by the forklift mast.  The two pictures 
demonstrate how a person can easily be concealed behind the forklift mast and missed by the operator.  
The picture on the left demonstrates the person fully hidden and the picture on the right demonstrates the 

 

 

person extending his arm to reveal his position. 

 

Showing incident site and directions of travel 

 

 

Showing forklift operator’s ‘blind spot’ 

  This tragedy is a stark reminder that when working near moving vehicles or heavy equipment, persons must 

Our member notes the following: 

remain in the operator’s full view; 

 

If you can’t see the operator, they won’t be able to see you; 

  Remain vigilant at all times around routine activities through exercising situational awareness; 

 
  Don’t ‘assume you are safe’, ‘ensure you are safe’; 

  During project mobilisation/demobilisation(s) and vessel port calls with/without  project  activity, focus must 

continue to be given to the following quayside arrangements: 

 

traffic management  

  designated walkways/segregation from traffic 
  crane operations  
 

landing and loading areas  

  vehicle banksman (where required and assessed as not adding risk)  
 

storage areas  
  parking areas  
  quayside edge operations  
  pre-shift briefings/toolbox talks. 

Our member took the following actions:  

  Circulated a safety notice to vessel crews via a scheduled ‘Time Out for Safety’ and to the industry via IMCA; 

  Revisit and reassess mobilisation and demobilisation plans, procedures, practices and briefings in light of the 

above; 

  Review  all  Project  Hazard  Identification  &  Risk  Analysis  (HIRA)  and  Vessel/Site  Risk  Assessments  to  ensure 

appropriate mitigation and controls are in place; 

  Review effectiveness of toolbox talks, supervision and working practices on mobilisation sites. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: hose): 

 

IMCA SF 04/07 – Incident 1 – Forklift truck incident. 

