Safety Flash 

April 2018 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  Dropped Object – Intermediate Bulk Container (IBC) 

What happened? 

An intermediate bulk container (IBC) was dropped from a crane to deck.  The incident occurred when a vessel crane 
was being used with a certified lifting device to lift and move an IBC containing 1000kg of monoethylene glycol.  As 
the IBC was moved, the liquid inside was sloshed around (owing to the ‘free surface’ effect) which changed the 
centre of gravity.  This change in the centre of gravity caused the IBC to rotate, resulting in the lift rigging device 
being unable to support the load.  Subsequently the IBC fell approximately 3.5 metres to the deck and burst open, 
spilling the contents.  The spill was contained onboard with no pollution to the environment. 

 
Result of dropped object – IBC after 

loss of load 

 
An IBC stored within appropriately 

designed lifting frame (note lift 

points at top of frame) 

Lifting arrangement used in this incident  

(re-enactment) 

 

 

 

 

 
What went wrong? 

There was no adequate risk assessment of the effects of the possible combination of: 

  The ‘free surface’ effect in the liquid within the IBC; 

  Vessel movement in sea states (within limits and minor); 

  Crane movement. 

The rigging installed to lift the IBC – whilst certified – was of incorrect selection which created: 

  Minimal resistance to side loading; 

  The lift bars were able to slide under the base of the load; 

  The load was lifted below the centre of gravity. 

What were the causes? 

Our members’ investigation is ongoing, but the current cause analysis determined: 

Inadequate risk assessment of the lift; 

Inappropriate selection of rigging arrangement; 

Inappropriate  design  of  storage  equipment/containers  for  liquids  which  require  movement  in  the  offshore 
environment. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned?  

  Review and re-assess the selection and use of liquid storage containers; 

  Review and re-assess the lifting and rigging arrangements in accordance to identified international standards; 

 

Lift plans and associated risk  assessments  should include  not only  lifting and rigging  arrangements but also 
possible movement of loads within storage containers which may affect centre of gravity. 

Our member also prohibited the lifting of IBC’s utilising ‘pallet’ type rigging arrangements, and made arrangements 
to transfer all IBCs into appropriately designed and certified lifting frames. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Uncontrolled rotation of 9.6m reel [investigation revealed a failure to recognise the importance of a change in 

the centre of gravity of a large and complex structure] 

  Fatality during lifting operations [early investigation noted that a heavy load moved in an unexpected way for 
a number of reasons, including induced momentum from crane swing, induced spin from offset of the centre 
of gravity, and vessel motion from sea state] 

  Dropped pallet during loading of stores 

2  BSEE: Potentially Catastrophic Crane and Lifting Incidents 

What happened? 

The  United  States’  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  has  published  Safety  Alert  no.  329 
relating to four recent safety incidents involving cranes and lifting devices: 

  While picking up a ‘slick joint’ to connect to a blowout preventer (BOP) stack, the joint, weighing over 19 tonnes, 
became dislodged and fell across the derrick, causing structural damage.  No personnel were in the drop zone 
at the time of the incident; 

  During the lifting of a diesel tote tank from a supply vessel, when the tank was around 1.5m off the deck, the 
fast line parted and about 40m of cable, crane headache ball, and tote tank fell to the deck.  Failure of the crane 

 

 

 

 

was caused by a frozen boom tip sheave, which caused the running line to jump the sheave.  No personnel were 
in the drop zone at the time of the incident; 

  A crane boom fell freely, hitting the side of a jack-up rig and puncturing a hole in a diesel tank.  The cause of 
the failure was missing retaining rings that held the pawl pin in place, causing the pin to dislodge.  38 barrels of 
diesel fuel escaped into the environment as a result of this incident; 

  During lifting of tubing from a rig to a workboat, one tubing joint slid out of a bundle of 12 joints and fell around 
40m to the deck of the workboat below.  The joint landed on an empty cutting box, puncturing the lid and then 
fell to the deck of the boat.  No personnel on the boat were near the area of the cutting box and there were no 
injuries. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

The BSEE recommends the following: 

  Ensure that proper planning is conducted prior to lifts.  This planning should include a review of drop zones, 
identification of safe zones while the lift(s) occur(s) and verification that all participants are trained in the work 
practices to conduct lifts and/or perform inspections; 

  Review the mechanical integrity program to verify that crane maintenance and inspections are being performed 
according to company, crane manufacturer and regulatory requirements.  Special consideration should be given 
to: 
  accessibility and inspection of a crane’s boom hoist lock pawl cylinder assembly 
  outer diameter measurements of boom, main, auxiliary and pendant cables 
  documentation on the installation date, manufacture date and identification information for boom, main, 

auxiliary and pendant cables 

 

inspection and lubrication of sheaves; and, 

  ensuring that wire rope size and sheave sizes are compatible; 

  Verify that loads are centred, balanced and secured prior to initiating lifts. 

The BSEE Safety Alert No. 329 can be found on the BSEE website.   

Members may wish to refer to the following guidance: 

  Guidelines for lifting operations (IMCA SEL 019) 

Lifting operations (video) 

Lifting equipment (video) 

  Risk assessment (video) 

  Safe Lifting (video) 

Members may also wish to refer to the following incidents: 

Incidents involving poor crane operations 

Lifting incident 

  Near-miss: dropped object from crane 

You can also search through our published safety alerts by typing key words, such as lifting operations and dropped 
objects, into the ‘search safety flashes’ bar on the IMCA safety flash web page: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
3  Worker Hit by Steel Plate Falling from Crane 

What happened? 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (UK HSE) reports that a company has been fined after an employee was injured 
when he was struck by a steel plate that fell from a crane. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

A person was carrying out work on a new metal staircase which was under construction.  The task involved using a 
crane to lift a steel sheet attached to a magnet, but the sheet became detached from the magnet and fell, striking 
the  injured person on the back  and  causing severe  back  injuries.  The worker fractured his spine and has been 
unable to continue working as a steel fixer.  

The UK HSE investigation found that the company had failed to ensure that the lifting equipment was of adequate 
strength and stability for each load.  Whilst the safe working load was 1000kg, the magnet had to be de-rated to 
take into account the thinness and the length of the metal being lifted.  The company also failed to ensure that the 
lifting operation was planned by a competent person, appropriately supervised and carried out in a safe manner. 

The full press release can be found on the HSE website. 

Members may also wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

LTI as a result of load dropped from lifting magnet 

4  Missing Protection Cover Becomes Potential Dropped Object 

What happened? 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) reports a near miss incident in which a small protective cover was lost from the 
deck of a vessel, and was later found in the pocket of a five-foot container which had been offloaded ashore.  This 
could have been a serious high potential dropped object risk to the crew, shore-side workers and to the general 
public. 

An  investigation  revealed that  the  rubber  which  keeps  the  deck covers  in  place  was  in  poor  condition  and  this 
enabled them to become loose and be washed out during heavy weather.  It was also observed that inadequate 
inspection and maintenance had been contributing factors.  

A temporary deck cover was made to remove the tripping hazards created by the missing cover. New covers were 
ordered and delivered on board.  Further recommendations were: 

What was the cause? 

What actions were taken? 

 

 
  Check the condition of the covers on a regular basis; 

  The inspection of the covers should be part of the onboard planned maintenance system; 

  After any heavy weather, deck crew should visually check the deck and if a cover is missing, try to locate the 

cover before discharging any cargo.  This is to help prevent the possibility of dropped objects. 

The MSF alert can be found on the MSF website.  Members may also wish to review the following incidents and 
videos: 

  Near miss: dropped object from crane  

  Dropped object incidents 

  Near miss: missing nut and split pin on shackle 

  Technip Drops (video) 

  Safe Lifting (video) 

  Risk Assessment (video) 

5 

Load Fell from Trailer After It Was Inadequately Secured 

What happened? 

Two articulated lorries with 20’ trailers were organised to move equipment, including lifeboat davits, a power-pack, 
winches and sheave blocks, from one location to another.  The first trailer was loaded inside a shed, then driven 
outside to complete lashings and allow simultaneous loading of the second trailer.  During the movement of the 
first trailer, the free end of a single lashing became entangled in the tractor unit wheels, breaking the strap and 
allowing part of the load to topple from the trailer onto the roadway. 

The winch after the incident – 

Position on road where winch 

Position where snatch blocks came to 

shown here correctly secured with 

came to rest 

rest 

 

 

 

ratchet straps 

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

The loads were inadequately secured on the trailer, resulting in a davit winch and two sheave blocks falling on to 
the road.  This incident had potential for personal injury and damage to other road users.   

The loose end of the strap securing the winch and blocks was not stowed correctly.  The driver took the vehicle out 
of the shed to allow the second collection trailer to access the shed, and continued to drive out of the front yard 
area, then proceeded to take a wide arc left over the middle of the port’s road.  A loud bang was heard as a winch 
and two snatch blocks fell from the vehicle.  A worker witnessed a loose strap flapping on the trailer's nearside, 
before hearing the loud bang.  However, the vehicle was too far away for him to intervene.   

 

 
The incident area was made safe by removing the fallen equipment from the road to the shed.  Other than surface 
damage, the equipment appeared to be unharmed.  Additional ratchet straps were placed on the winch for extra 
security. 

What lessons were learned? 

load; 

  The winch was a heavy piece of equipment with a high and offset centre of gravity, rendering it an unstable 

  A conventional pallet was unsuitable for the type, shape and size of the equipment.  Consideration should have 

been given to shipping the items in half height containers; 

  There was a failure to effectively secure the load before movement of the truck, and there was poor practice 

in not securing the free end of a securing strap; 

  A dedicated loader or dispatcher should discuss loading arrangements with the driver; 

  The driver should remain in a safe area during the loading operation; 

  Vehicles with an open flatbed should have their loads secured before entering and exiting the worksite. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

 

Loading and securing of cargo 

  Unsecured cargo inside containers 

 

