Safety Flash 

 March 2018 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Incidents Following Unsafe Management of Vehicles 

These four incidents come from the UK Health & Safety Executive (UK HSE).  These injuries or fatalities occurred 
because heavy vehicular plant and workers were not safely managed.  Whilst these were not incidents from the 
maritime or offshore sector, there are lessons to be drawn from these incidents in terms of ensuring safe systems 
of work, management of simultaneous operations,  ensuring crew are  not in the “line of fire”,  lift planning, and 
working at height.  

 

1 

Fatality: Worker Crushed Between Two Items of Moving Plant 

What happened? 

The UK HSE reports that a civil engineering company has been sentenced for safety breaches after a worker suffered 
fatal crush injuries when he was caught between two pieces of heavy plant.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

The worker was caught between a 21-tonne tracked excavator moving backwards whilst involved in digging, and a 
stationary dumper truck.  He was crushed and pronounced dead at the scene.  

The  HSE  inspector  noted:  “If  the  two  separate  work  activities  cannot  be  avoided,  then  the  area  should  be 
safeguarded and effectively managed with segregation in place, for example using fencing or barriers to delineate 
the ‘no go’ areas for pedestrians.” 

The full press release can be found on the HSE website.  

Members may wish to review the importance of traffic separation and the safe-guarding of pedestrian workers in 
the context of quayside, dry dock bottom, and ship yard.   

 

 

 
2  Worker Lost His Leg When He Was Hit by A Forklift Truck During Lifting Operations 

What happened? 

The UK HSE reports that an engineering company has been fined after a worker lost his leg from the knee down 
when he was hit by a forklift truck.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

A worker was seriously injured whilst carrying out a lifting operation involving the transporting and loading of pipe 
spools onto a flatbed truck.  A forklift truck, for which he was acting as banksman, drove into the back of his left 
heel.  His left leg had to be amputated at the knee. 

UK  HSE  investigation  found  that  the  company  had  failed  to  properly  plan,  organise  and  carry  out  the  lifting 
operation in a safe manner. 

The HSE inspector noted: “All lifts must be properly planned, assessed and carried out in a safe manner.  There were 
other safer, reasonably practicable options that the company could have taken to prevent the forklift coming into 
contact with the individual.  The safest method in this instance was to use tag lines or push sticks to control the load, 
as opposed to controlling the load by hand.” 

The full press release can be found on the HSE website. 

3  Worker Fatally Injured in Falling from A Scissor-Lift Platform Which Collided with Another Vehicle 

What happened? 

The UK HSE reports that a company has been fined after a worker suffered fatal injuries.  The worker was operating 
a scissor-lift working platform when this was struck by a Long Goods Vehicle (LGV), causing him to be ejected onto 
a roadway from a height of 1.5 metres. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

An investigation by the UK HSE found: 

workers; 

workplace transport operations. 

  The  company  had  failed  to  plan  and  organise  work  at  height  in  a  manner  that  ensured  the  safety  of  their 

  The  work  at  height  should  have  been  organised  to  segregate  activity  in  space  and/or  time  from  adjacent 

The  HSE  inspector  commented:  “This  was  a  tragic  and  wholly  avoidable  incident,  caused  by  the  failure  of  the 
company  to  implement  and  monitor  safe  systems  of  work.    The  company  did  not  undertake  the  simple  safety 
measure of segregating those working at height from adjacent workplace transport operations, in line with widely 
available industry guidance.” 

The full press release can be found on the HSE website. 
 

 

 

 
4  Worker Struck and Injured by Tipper Truck 

What happened? 

The UK HSE reports the prosecution of a building contractor after a worker was struck and injured by a tipper truck.  
The  incident  occurred  at  a  time  of  simulataneous  operations;  there  were  a  number  of  tipper  trucks  delivering 
material to the site and various workers were directing the drivers to different areas.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes?  

The injured worker was walking along a haul road in an attempt to attract the attention of a vehicle in another area 
of the site when he was struck and run over by a tipper truck.  The worker suffered serious injuries including several 
broken bones in both legs and feet and severe damage to the blood vessels in his legs.  His injuries resulted in him 
having his right leg amputated to the knee over 12 months after the incident. 

A HSE investigation found that there were insufficient protected walkways across the site and that there was no 
control over access to the site.  The investigation also found that there was an accepted practice of walking on haul 
roads and that there was a lack of an up to date traffic management plan. 

It was noted that worksites where plant and pedestrians may be operating together should be organised in a way 
which prevents pedestrians and vehicles coming into contact with each other.  This is as true of quaysides and dry 
dock bottoms as it is of the land-based construction site in this example.  

The full press release can be found on the HSE website. 

With reference to the incidents above, the following incidents may also be of interest: 

  Near Miss: worker in dockyard almost struck by a ‘cherry picker’ crane 

  Worker trapped and injured by reversing vehicle 

  Fatality: crew member struck by forklift during quayside operations 

  Worker was injured by a fork lift truck 

  Two Industrial Vehicle Incidents 

  Fatality during basket transfer   

Members may wish to refer to: 

IMCA videos 
  Working at height (short) and Working at height (longer) 
  Lifting operations (short) and Safe lifting (longer) 
  Line of Fire (short) and In the line of fire (longer) 

IMCA Guidance  
  Guidance on safety in shipyards SEL 032  
  Guidelines for lifting operations SEL 019  

Further IMCA Safety promotional material can also be found on our website.   

 

 

 

