AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/01 

August 2001 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of ROV Lift Umbilical Winch Brake – Update 

In  the  Safety  Flash  08/01  we  reported  an  incident  concerning  an  uncontrolled  ROV  umbilical  winch  run  off  involving  a 
MacArtney  CORMAX  unit  manufactured  by  Norlau.    The  member  company  has  updated  us  on  this  issue  noting  that  the 
manufacturer has now acknowledged that there is a design problem and that until they can provide a technical solution the 
manufacturer recommends that that winches should be operated at LOW SPEED only.  This is a short term measure; the 
long term solution may involve modifications to the winch system. 

2  Hazard Potential from Equipment using Enclosed Rechargeable Batteries 

A member has reported that a damage event occurred recently at one of their workshop facilities, where a sealed housing 
containing a rechargeable battery pack exploded.  In this incident a ‘Divescan’ system was in the process of being assembled 
and tested, and the system was being powered by its uninterruptable power supply (UPS) component. 

At the end of the test, when the technician switched off the power from the UPS, the UPS housing lid blew off, bounced off a 
shelf at eye level, and landed some distance away in the workshop area.  Fortunately, it missed the technician and he was not 
injured. 

Further to this particular incident, a CTD (conductivity, temperature and depth) probe battery casing on ROV operating one 
of the members vessel’s on also exploded; again without injury. 

As a result of these two common undesired events, the following procedures, have been issued by the company concerned: 

  Always closely inspect the equipment containing rechargeable batteries, prior to, and after use, for any signs of external 
damage,  water  ingress,  broken  connectors  etc.    In  cases  where  there  is  damage  or  damage  is  suspected,  competent 
personnel only should examine such equipment further – before it is then used; 

  Equipment containing rechargeable batteries should be subject to an annual inspection by competent technical personnel 

who have received the appropriate product training; 

  When carrying out maintenance on such equipment, especially if enclosed in a pressure housing, always consider that the 
equipment could potentially be pressurised and take all necessary precautions when handling and dismantling the unit. 
(i.e. wear a full face mask, dismantle the end cap assembly of the subsea housing pointing it away from yourself and other 
personnel.); 

  When  the  equipment  requires  an  external  unit  to  charge  the  batteries,  always  use  the  charger  specified  by  the 

manufacturer of the equipment, thus minimising risk of damage to the equipment or harm to the operator; 

  Operators  of  such  equipment  must  use  the  correct  charging  procedure  outlined  in  the  manufacturer’s  operating 

  Battery condition and replacement history should be recorded by a notice attached to the equipment and in the planned 

instructions; 

maintenance records. 

3  ROV Winch Failure 

One of our members has reported an ROV winch failure during drill support on a semi submersible drill rig working in 80-
100 meters water depth. 

Safety Flash 

 

During  a  ROV  launch  the  vehicle  was  raised  approximately  1.8  meters  to  allow  the  moonpool  doors  to  open.    With  the 
doors secured open the ROV was lowered through the moonpool.  When the top of the TMS became level with the cellar 
deck the winch went into free fall.  Since all attempts by the winch operator to gain control of the winch had no effect, the 
winch  operator  and  ROV  crew  secured  the  area,  put  safety  barriers  in  place  and  a  person  posted  to  prevent  any  one 
entering the launch area.  The 1500 meters of steel armoured umbilical had spooled off the winch drum and the end was 
retained by the clamp mechanism on the drum. 

No one was injured and there was no damage to subsea structures resulting from the incident. 

The  initial  investigation  conducted  by  the  winch/gearbox  manufacturers  has  shown  a  bearing  in  the  gearbox  had  failed 
allowing  the  output  shaft  with  the  drive  pinion  to  be  ejected  from  the  gearbox.    The  winch  manufacturer  is  Lawson 
Engineers, and the gearbox manufacturer is Brevini. 

Both the hydraulic lock and the failsafe brake are on the input side of the gearbox and had operated correctly, but when the 
output  shaft  was  ejected  the  drive  pinion  lost  contact  with  the  drum  gear  ring  and  all  control  of  the  drum  was  lost.  
The winch then went into freefall. 

The following actions have been initiated by the member concerned: 

  Gearbox oil samples to be taken from all similar winches in service to establish any signs of early bearing failure; 

  Oil replaced in all gearboxes to allow an even starting point for future analysis; 

  Gearbox oil samples to be taken every three months and analysed to help early detection of any future bearing failure; 

  A mechanical retaining plate to be retrofitted to all similar winches to prevent the gearbox output shaft being ejected 

and causing the drive pinion to loose contact with the drum ring gear. 

4  Failure of Plastic Floatation Buoy 

We have received the following information concerning a failure of a plastic floatation buoy.  During deepwater operations 
on one of our member’s vessels, a sling had been recovered to surface and riggers were in the process of removing a cluster 
of plastic flotation buoys.  These buoys were rated for 150 bar external pressure and were hollow air filled types. 

Without warning or any obvious signs of damage, one of the buoys exploded, resulting in two halves of the float flying apart 
with some force (see picture below).  Fortunately no-one was injured, however this serious near miss serves to remind us, 
that such events are not unknown and for this reason, IMCA produced IMCA Guidance Note IMCA R 001 – Plastic spherical 
air-filled fishing buoys – concerning failures of this type of buoy giving recommendations on their use. 

Whilst  the  floats  being  used  were  suitably  pressure  rated,  the  company  concerned  cannot  be  sure  that  either  through 
manufacturing  defects  or  due  to  rough  handling  that  fissures  in  the  seam  of  the  floats  allowed  the  internal  void  to  be 
pressurised. 

A number of IMCA member companies have a policy of not using plastic buoys. 

 

