AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/13 

Safety Flash 

  September 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Marine Safety Forum Safety Flashes 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  www.marinesafetyforum.org/  regularly  publishes  safety  flashes,  many,  but  not  all,  of  which 
may be of interest to IMCA members. IMCA keeps a watching brief on MSF safety flashes, and if it is considered that there 
are lessons to be learnt, or that there is clear value to IMCA members in passing the information on directly, then the  MSF 
flash will be  recirculated without comment as part of the  IMCA Safety Flash system. Here are  a selection of recent safety 
flashes from the MSF which may be of interest to members.  

1  Gangway Detached from Vessel   

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  the  gangway  platform  got 
detached from the vessel, causing the platform and the gangway to drop approximately 0.5-1m until it was left hanging by the 
securing ropes and the safety net. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.23.pdf  

2  High Potential Near Miss during Cargo Operations     

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  incident  in  which  two  crewmen  narrowly 
escaped  severe  crush  injuries  whilst  engaged  in  cargo  back-loading  operations  alongside  a  platform.  Owing  to  inadequate 
communications, a load was lifted and began to swing without warning to crew working on deck.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.24.pdf  

3  Bulk Hose Entanglement with Azi-pod Propulsion Unit 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which a hose became entangled with 
an Azi-pod propulsion unit. The incident occurred during preparations to deliver water to a platform. It was decided to use 
the aft manifold connection on the starboard quarter for the water transfer, and two AB’s were standing by ready to connect 
the hose. After being lowered by the crane, the hose was observed to sink in the water close to the stern cut-away, under 
which the Azi-pod units are mounted.   

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.26.pdf  

4 

Injuries on Mud Mixers   

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding two hand injury incidents, in which crew members 
were injured on sharp blades on mud mixing equipment on platform supply vessels. 

The first incident occurred during tank cleaning of a mud tank when a crewman lost his footing, and, on putting his hand out 
to steady himself, sliced his finger through his gloves on the mud mixer blade. 
 

 

 
In the second incident, a crewman removed the protective cover fitted on the mud mixer in order to clean it. During this 
process he managed to rotate the blade into his own leg, causing a cut which required 6 stitches. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.27.pdf  

5  Fast Rescue Craft Unplanned Descent     

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash  regarding  an  unplanned  lowering  of  a  fast  rescue  craft 
(FRC).  The  incident  occurred  after  a  fast  rescue  craft  was  retrieved  to  a  height  of  23  metres  above  sea  level  following 
operational duties. When “hoist up” control input was given via the davit controls the FRC started an unplanned but gradual 
descent to the sea. With controls returned to the neutral position the descent continued. Activation of the emergency stop 
also did not stop the descent.  

It  was  concluded  that  both  hoist  brakes  had  functionally  failed  and  that  the  only  brake  arresting  the  descent  was  the 
mechanical centrifugal/inertia brake. Four persons were aboard the FRC but no injuries were sustained. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.29.pdf    

