Safety Flash 

 April 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

The following incidents all involve actual injuries – a “line of fire” finger injury, an eye injury caused when a foreign 
body was shaken off personal protective equipment (PPE) into the eye, and a leg injury caused by a flying object.  

1 

Serious Finger Injury: Procedures During Engine Maintenance 

A member has reported an incident in which an engineer suffered 
a serious finger injury during planned engine maintenance.  The 
incident occurred alongside during overhaul of a main engine in 
which the pistons were being replaced.   

Upon removing one of the pistons, the bottom end bearing cap 
had been removed and the crankshaft was being turned down to 
move the crank pin and main bearing shells out of the way of the 
serrated  con  rod  bottom.    The  injured  person’s  right  hand  was 
holding the con rod off the crank pin in order not to damage the 
cylinder liner and crank pin/bottom end bearing shells. 

The  crank  web  counter  balance  was  not  seen  by  the  injured 
person as it came around and trapped his little finger between the con rod and crank web counter balance.  The 
crank was immediately turned back and his hand removed from the crank case.  He was given first aid treatment 
on board for a laceration across the width of his right little finger and then immediately sent to local hospital for 
further treatment. 

He returned to the ship the same day having received 7 stiches to the right little finger; the hospital confirmed that 
there was no other damage. 

Our member noted the following: 

on-file;  

  Work Planning – the work was fully planned, with Risk Assessment and Toolbox Talks conducted, recorded and 

  PPE  –  the  injured  person  was  wearing  full  required  PPE  including  mechanics  gloves;  use  of  these  gloves 

prevented the injury being far worse; 

 

Immediate Actions – on-board immediate first aid was applied and subsequent external medical treatment 
was sought; 

  Follow-up Actions – the vessel is updating the existing risk assessment to improve safety emphasis on correct 

hand placement during the task; 

  Hand Placement – the injured person had his hand in an unsafe location within the machinery, between the 
con rod and counter balance; his hand should have been on the con rod itself, with thumb tucked in, to avoid 
pinch/trapping risks as the counter balance moved.   

 

 

 

 

Feedback from vessel crews 

 

 

On learning about this incident, crews asked a number of questions about the incident: 

  Question: How was the engine barred over? When doing unit liner changes in the past, I always barred over by 

hand (i.e. very slowly); was this instance hydraulic or pneumatic powered? 
  Answer: The engine is barred over using the electric motor powered turning gear.  Because of the mounted 
position of the turning gear it would be unfeasible to rig up any method of "hand" turning gear.  The only 
method  of  hand  turning  the  electrically-driven  turning  gear  is  by  means  of  a  machined  square  on  an 
extension of the electric motor shaft, but the gearing within the system renders this method of turning the 
shaft impracticable as it would take excessive  amounts  of time  for even the  smallest  movement of the 
crankshaft. 

  Question: Had the injured person done this type of job before? 

  Answer: Yes, the injured person has carried out this job before and is an experienced 3rd Engineer, having 

recently passed his 2nd Engineer's CoC. 

  Question: Was the Engine Manual being followed? 

  Answer:  Yes.    The  engine  manual  was  being  followed  rigorously  during  this  overhaul  as  is  an  absolute 
requirement for safe operation and future reliability of the engine.  There is a dedicated team of competent 
engineers  and  fitters  assigned  to  the  task,  full  inspections  and  calibrations  are  taking  place  and  a 
comprehensive report being compiled.  Correct re-assembly procedures and torque settings were being 
followed  rigorously  and  any  suspect  components  replaced.    It  should  be  noted that  the  engine  manual 
provides little specific guidance on handling components during maintenance. 

  Question: Was a soft strop used around the con rod, to lift it off the shaft? 

  Answer:  Not  at  the  time  but,  since  the  incident,  we  have  carefully  considered  different  options  for 
supporting the piston and connecting rod whilst turning the crankshaft out, whilst also protecting these 
components from damage; it is possible to use a substantial wooden lever or a soft strop to avoid placing 
hands inside. 

  Question: What type of engine was it – a V or Inline?  In the case of an Inline Engine, once the second last piston 
is disconnected, the Crankshaft would turn very quickly due to the weight of the last Piston having a turning 
effect on the crankshaft. 
  Answer: V engine.  It is recognised that V engines are more difficult to work on, compared to inline engines, 
due to smaller components for a given power output and restricted space in the crankcase.  This vessel has 
a very large number of cylinder units (40 in total) requiring periodic overhaul which adds time and potential 
risk to engine work. 

Members may wish to refer to the following: 

 

IMCA SF 28/16 – Focus: Hand injuries; 

IMCA SF 13/11 – Incident 2 – LTI: thumb Injury. 

 Eye Injury: Crewman Got Something in His Eye When Removing His PPE 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  seafarer  had  to  receive 
medical treatment due to a foreign object getting in his eye.  The incident 
occurred when the injured person had been chipping with a chipping gun 
and other tools.  At the end of his shift, approximately 17.20 local time, he 
stopped  the  gun  and  began  removing  his  PPE.    While  removing  his  face 
shield, some rust debris – trapped on top of the face shield’s upper lip – fell 
onto his face and into his left eye.  He immediately went to the nearest eye 
wash station and flushed his eye thoroughly.  Assuming that his condition 
was not serious, he did not report this occurrence to anyone else on-board even though he felt the foreign object 
was still caught in his eye. 

At 07.30 the following morning, before starting his shift, he went to the 2nd Officer, complaining of his condition. 
After close examination by the 2nd Officer, it became apparent that there was still debris in the injured persons left 
eye, so it was decided to land the injured person to the local medical clinic for further treatment.  At the clinic, the 
particle was removed and anti-infection medication was  issued;  the  seafarer was returned to the vessel on the 
same day. 

What went right:  

on-file; 

What went wrong: 

you think it is! 

  Work Planning – The work was fully planned, with Risk Assessment and Toolbox Talks conducted, recorded and 

  PPE – He was wearing full required PPE – boots, helmet, coveralls, gloves, full face shield and safety glasses 

underneath the face shield; 

 

Immediate Actions – He went immediately to the eye wash station to self-administer initial first aid. 

  He did not report the incident – report every incident, near miss and observation, regardless of how minor 

  Had he reported immediately to the Medical Officer, further first aid could have been administered on board 

and a hospital visit could have been avoided; 

  He removed his face shield without being careful – when removing any PPE and equipment be sure to clean off 
as much debris as possible; this will prevent foreign objects, dust, debris, particles etc. coming into contact with 
you. 

General advice on removing head & face protection: 

  Bend forward at the waist – this will ensure any debris falls onto the deck away from you and not into your face 

  Ask for help – if necessary, get a shipmate to “spot” you as you go, so they can remove any debris from your 

and down your coveralls! 

PPE and clothing before taking it off. 

Whilst members’ attention can be drawn to a number of previous eye injuries, none have as a causal factor the 
careless way in which the injured person removed his PPE, unfortunately allowing debris into his eye.  

Please see the IMCA pocket card Keep Your Eyes on Safety. 

 
 

2 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Leg Injured While Dealing with Vent Flaps  

A member has reported an incident in which a crew member suffered a serious 
leg injury whilst closing ventilation flaps.  Two crewmen, one an AB, the other 
a more inexperienced Cadet, were on the upper deck closing the flaps when a 
crank handle used to wind the flaps closed became detached and flew through 
the  air.   It  hit  one  of  the crewmen  on  his  right  shin,  lacerating  his  skin  and 
fracturing his leg.  He was evacuated by helicopter for treatment ashore.  

 
3 

 

 

 

Our members’ investigation noted the following: 

  Each crewman closed a different vent, winding the handles anti-clockwise; 

  The Cadet felt no more counter weight on his crank handle and informed the AB that his vent was closed; 

  The AB told him keep turning the handle to “make sure”: 

  by  continuing  to  turn  the  handle  counter  clockwise  the  cadet  had  started  to  raise  the  vent  flap  again 

(turning the cable the opposite way onto the drum); 

  After less than a minute of further turning the cadet felt weight coming onto the handle again and accidently 
let go.  The handle quickly rotated clockwise and the crank handle detached and flew through the air, hitting 
the AB; 

  The vent house door remained padlocked following a port call – there was no visual means of checking that the 

flaps were closing; 

  There was no written Risk Assessment for the operation; 

  There were a number of immediate causes: 

the emergency release lever was in the wrong position 

the safety locks were stuck open due to a rusted sheave trapping the wires 

the shallow indentation and wingnut screw used to secure the handle was inadequate; 

  Causal factors that were identified: 

lack of experience and knowledge: The Cadet did not trust his initial judgment that the flap was closed and 
followed the instruction to keep turning.  A more experience crewmember may have been more confident 
to trust his instinct.  He was not aware of proper position of the emergency release and was confused by 
the instructions painted above 

 

inadequate planning and procedures, inadequate maintenance and design of equipment; 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  Root causes identified: 

 

 

risk was not fully assessed or understood and was considered tolerable   

instructions and warnings were unclear and confusing 

  maintenance of the wires, sheaves, winches locks and handles was not adequate 
 

the securing mechanism for the crank handle was poor and left the handle inadequately secured; 

  The preventative action taken was to: 
  prepare training in this operation 
  develop a risk assessment including minimum crewing required to do the task safely 
  appropriate maintenance and repair of the wires, sheaves, winches locks and handles 
  Ensure instructions are correct. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

IMCA SF 09/12 – Incident 2 –Near miss: cement tank hatch failure; 

IMCA SF 04/16 – Incident 5 – Finger injury: pinch point [involving opening a hatch]. 

 

 

 

 

