Safety Flash 

 August 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 22/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  Counterfeit Training Certificates 

What happened? 

IMCA  has  been  advised  that  there  has  been  a  recent  increase  in  counterfeit  training 
certificates in circulation for crane operators, riggers, banksman/slingers etc.   It is reported 
that  the  majority  of  these  seem  to  be  originating  from  Asia  but  some  have  also  been 
discovered in the Middle East.   

Many of these counterfeit documents are very good computer generated copies and almost 
indistinguishable from the genuine certificates.  Some of these counterfeit certificates purport 
to be issued by leading training providers. 

Members  are  advised  that  prospective  employers  should  check  the  authenticity  of  any 
certificates presented by candidates, with the training provider who issued the certificate. 

 Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Counterfeit Admiralty Products; 

  False Or Scam Emails – Warning. 

The remainder of the incidents in this Safety Flash relate to incidents involving land-based vehicles – including 
fork lift trucks – but are nevertheless considered worthy of bringing to members’ attention. 

2  Passenger Safety in Retrofitted Mini-Vans/Buses 

What happened? 

An  International  Association  of  Oil  &  Gas  Producers  (IOGP)  member 
reports  on  an  audit  into  the  use  of  retrofitted  vehicles,  e.g.  converted 
cargo-duty  mini-vans/buses  for  passenger  transportation.    Inspections 
undertaken  in  Azerbaijan  demonstrated  that  retrofitted  vehicles  with 
supplier  certification  (e.g.  “letter  of  conformance”),  for  the  retrofit 
installation and anchoring of seats can potentially be unsafe.  Inspected 
vehicles were found to be out of conformance with the standards set out 
by United Nations Vehicle Regulations 17 for seat anchoring – see here for 
details. 

 

 

 
Where the seat anchoring is inadequate, there is a potential risk that in the event of a collision, 
the seats could pull from the floor. 

What lessons were learnt?  What actions were taken? 

Members may wish to thoroughly inspect the seat anchorages on any retrofitted vehicles in 
use, and where issues with inadequate seat anchorage bolts are identified, take appropriate 
action.  The IOGP Safety Alert (#287) notes: 

  Verify through inspection the  type of seat  anchorage  bolts  used.    Seat anchorage  bolts 
where “square plates” (Figure 1) are welded to the bolts might be inadequate in holding 
the seat in its position in the event of lateral force being applied (e.g. during collision).  
Only use appropriate, fit for purpose, bolts (e.g. made out of one piece) to robustly secure 
the seat. 

  Verify through inspection the anchoring of the supporting rails and rail supporting beams.  
These might be inadequately anchored to the vehicle when retrofitted (Figure 2).  These 
rails and beams must be adequately anchored to the chassis (e.g. bolted). 

3  Worker Trapped and Injured by Reversing Vehicle  

What happened? 

An IOGP safety alert recounts how, at a land-based seismic survey camp, a worker was trapped and injured when 
a reversing vehicle did not stop.  Someone was working as a spotter helping a crane operator reverse a mobile 
crane into position.  As the crane reversed to approximately 1.5m from the desired position, the spotter reached 
for his radio to give the STOP command, but lost his balance in snowy conditions.  While he regained his balance, 
the crane continued to reverse.  As a result, the spotter was caught between the outrigger and the well house, 
causing an injury to his right wrist. 

Aerial view of spotter and crane position 

Aerial/plan view of scene of incident 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The spotter lost his balance placing him in the line of fire; 

  The crane operator continued to reverse after losing visual contact with the spotter.  The spotter and the crane 
operator had previously agreed that if visual contact was lost that they would rely on verbal communication 
but did not agree that the verbal communication would be constant; 

  This method of positioning the crane was considered normal by the two employees; 

  While moving, the crane outrigger was left extended to prevent potential hydraulic oil leaks; 

 

 
  The pre-task discussion had not identified these hazards. 

What lessons were learnt?  What actions were taken? 

  Users  of  mobile  equipment  or  vehicles  (cranes,  fork  lift  trucks  etc.)  should  establish  clear  communication 

  Persons on the ground or on deck near moving vehicles should never allow themselves to be “in the line of 

protocols before starting work; 

fire”; 

  When operating mobile equipment or vehicles, if visual or verbal contact is lost  with  people nearby on the 

ground, STOP immediately until contact is re-established and safe operation can continue. 

In  summary,  IMCA  notes  that  this  was  a  wholly  avoidable  injury  for  which  one  causal  factor  was  lack  of 
communication, and as such it is of interest to IMCA members in the marine or dockside context. The IOGP Safety 
Alert can be found here.  

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Fatality: Crew Member Struck By Forklift During Quayside Operations. 

4  Worker was Injured by a Fork Lift Truck  

What happened? 

A worker was struck by a reversing fork lift truck which resulted in him fracturing his pelvis.  
His employer was prosecuted by the UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) and fined.  See the 
press release here.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Investigation by the UK HSE found that the company had: 

  Failed to consider the risk created by vehicles and pedestrians operating in the same area; 

  Failed to implement a traffic management plan to ensure workers and vehicles were adequately segregated; 

  Failed to install physical barriers to clearly segregate pedestrians and vehicles. 

An  HSE  inspector  said:  “This  incident  could  so  easily  have  been  avoided  by  simply  carrying  out  correct  control 
measures and safe working practices.” 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Fatality: Crew Member Struck By Forklift During Quayside Operations. 

5  Worker Crushed by Dropped/Falling Object 

What happened? 

A load from the top of a double-decked trailer fell onto a worker, causing life-changing injuries. His employer was 
prosecuted by the UK HSE and fined.  See press release here.  

The employee was injured when a piece of metal ducting, six metres long and weighing 28kg, fell from the top deck 
of a trailer, hitting him on his head. The blow caused serious, life changing injuries, including a fractured skull.  

 

 

 

 

 
What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Investigation by the UK HSE found that: 

been implemented at this site; 

about these rules not being followed. 

  Whilst the company had developed systems and procedures for unloading of trailers at depots, these had not 

  Employees were  not properly  informed about pedestrian and vehicle  segregation rules, and little was done 

An HSE Inspector said: “This incident could so easily have been avoided by simply implementing suitable control 
measures  and  safe  working  practices.  The  company  itself  had  identified  and  easily  implemented  the  necessary 
measures after this tragic event.” 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Near Miss: Dropped Object From Cargo. 

 

