AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/12 

Safety Flash 

  July 2012 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  LTI – Incident with Circular Saw Leads to Loss of Thumb    

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman cut off the top of his thumb and his middle finger whilst working 
with  a  circular  table  top  bench  saw.  The  incident  occurred  when  the  crewman  was  cutting  5mm  thick  plywood  with  the 
circular saw in order to make shelving for other plywood pieces. The plywood was laid flat on the bench with the injured 
persons’ hands laid flat on top of the plywood, but the plywood snagged and dragged the crewman's right hand towards the 
spinning blade. The injured person was medivaced ashore by helicopter in a timely manner after immediate first aid onboard 
had been administered. The surgeons at the local hospital managed to reattach the middle finger but the top of the thumb 
was lost.  

An investigation revealed the following: 

♦  No risk assessment had been conducted for the operation; 

♦  The  equipment  was  incorrectly  set  up  and  incorrectly  operated  by  the  injured  person,  though  he  stated  that  he  was 

familiar with the operation of the equipment; 

♦  The bench saw was supplied on board with the necessary safety equipment and full instructions for its safe operation.  
These instructions included reference to the use of the safety guard, a special tool for pushing the wood through, and 
the  requirement  to  set  the  cutting  blade  to  the  correct  level  in  accordance  with  the  thickness  of  the  wood  that  was 
being cut;  

♦  The instruction manual appeared not to have been available at the workplace and the safety requirements for the safe 

operation of the saw were either not fully understood or were disregarded; 

♦  There was no guard fitted to the circular saw blade. 

Unguarded bench saw 

 

 

The following lessons were learnt:  

♦  All  power  tools  have  the  potential  to  cause  serious  injury  if  they  are  operated  incorrectly  and  without  the 

manufacturers’ approved and fitted safety devices; 

♦  A  risk  assessment  must  be  completed  and  filed  prior  to  using  any  power  tool.    The  assessment  must  take  into 

consideration the following: 
– 
– 
– 

the competence of the persons using the equipment 
the condition of the equipment being used 
the  provision  and  proper  functioning  of  adequate  safety  guards  and  cut-out  devices  such  as  emergency  stops  and 
barriers 
general working environmental conditions such as lighting 
availability and condition of any personal protective equipment; 

– 
– 

♦  Guards must always be fitted to equipment when designed to have them in place during operations; 

♦  Power equipment should be operated in accordance with the procedures and rules set  for their safe use; 

♦  Full training, manuals and instructions should be available, and manuals and instructions should always be read and fully 

understood by even experienced operators; 

♦  Complacency is a serious issue to be guarded against, especially in experienced personnel. 

Members are also referred to IMCA safety promotional material: 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SPC 08 – Watch your hands: you’ve only got one set; 

IMCA SPP 08 – Use tools and equipment properly. 

2  Small Fire and Minor Injury during Gas Cutting  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  small  fire  caused  a  minor  injury  during  the  use  of  oxyacetylene  cutting 
equipment. The incident occurred when a welder was using the equipment to cut a piece of steel plate on the deck of the 
vessel.    When the oxygen ran out the welder attached the regulator to  a full bottle of oxygen.   On reigniting the  gas the 
oxygen failed to reach the flame.  As the welder was attempting to diagnose the fault, the oxygen hose detached from the 
burner.  There was a fire which burned through the leg of his overall and burned his thigh.  

The  fire  watcher  reacted  promptly  and  switched  off  the  gases  at  the  bottles.  This  action  quickly  extinguished  the  fire  and 
prevented  any  escalation.  The  welder  was  taken  to  a  local  hospital  where  his  injuries  were  found  to  be  minor  and  after 
treatment he was allowed back to work.  His injuries could easily have been more serious. 

An investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The gas hoses were attached to the burner at check valves with crimped fittings; 

♦  The oxygen check valve was damaged by the effects of the fire;  

♦  The acetylene check valve was still connected to the hose.  When the hose was removed it was found to have a deep 
score across the fitting (see image below).  The damage was consistent with the blade of a hacksaw.  It appears to have 
been caused when the hoses were being re-terminated.  It was assumed that the oxygen fitting had similar damage which 
had added to the likelihood of its failure causing the gas release and fire; 

♦  The equipment had been inspected and passed  as fit for use by an external agency three weeks prior to the accident.  

The equipment was only inspected visually and the hoses were not removed to examine the fittings;  

♦  The  welder  was  wearing  standard  coveralls  which  were  not  sufficient  to  withstand  the  effects  of  the  fire.    He  was 

wearing nylon jogging trousers under his coveralls which melted and added to his injuries. 

 

 

Damaged acetylene fitting 

 

It was noted that there was no specific procedure for the connection of regulators to gas bottles, maintenance of the cutting 
equipment or for the re-termination of the hoses. The following actions were taken: 

♦  The burning equipment was replaced;  

♦ 

Instructions were included so that when re-termination takes place, the check valve fittings should be replaced with new 
fitting; 

♦  Welders are now required to wear protective overalls appropriate to their work and additional training for welders was 

provided.    

3  Two Recent Cases of Hand and Arm Injuries 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published two recent safety flashes regarding incidents in which personnel have injured 
their hands or arms. 

In the first incident, a crewman cut the palm of his hand on a sharp edge found on a door finishing strip. On investigation of 
the door in question an unexpected razor sharp steel burr (ragged edge) was discovered. This was most likely caused by the 
cutting process of the steel during the manufacture of the door.  Other similar doors onboard were checked  and some of 
these also had the same sharp edge.  

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.25.pdf 

In the second incident, which occurred during mooring operations, a crewman got his hand trapped between the mooring 
line and a roller fairlead on deck. As his hand was dragged around the fairlead his arm was twisted and fractured.  

The report can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-12.26.pdf 

Members are reminded to encourage personnel to look after their hands and arms. IMCA produces a range of pocket safety 
cards covering aspects of hand and arm safety: 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SPC 08 – Watch your hands: you’ve only got one set; 

IMCA SPP 09 – Watch out for pinch points; 

IMCA SPC 11 – Stay safe at the wheel - Cutting and grinding safety; 

IMCA SPC 16 – Caught between and pinch points: What you should know; 

IMCA SPC 17 – Hand-arm vibration: Control the risks. 

 
4  Confined Space Entry Fatality 

The Accident Investigation Board of Norway (AIBN) has published the following safety flash regarding a confined space entry 
fatality  on  board  a  vessel,  in  which  a  crew  member  died  during  cargo  tank  cleaning  work.  The  incident  occurred  when  a 
crewman entered the cargo tank without breathing apparatus to retrieve a cargo sampling device.  The crewman collapsed 
inside the tank. He was rescued, but, despite efforts to save his life, he was later declared dead. 

The investigation undertaken by the AIBN noted the following points: 

♦  The crewman died as a result of oxygen deprivation. At the time of the accident, the oxygen content of the atmosphere 

at the bottom of the tank was probably less than 7.2%. The nitrogen content was probably over 90%; 

♦  The crewman was experienced and familiar with the risks involved in entering the tank, and probably thought he could 
‘get  away  with  it’  and  be  able  to  climb  down  the  ladder,  retrieve  the  equipment  and  climb  back  up  again  without  an 
oxygen supply; 

♦  The cause of the fatality was probably not due to a lack of knowledge, but a lack of motivation in relation to complying 

with the procedures in the management system; 

♦  Non-compliance with company confined space entry procedures was found to be more widespread on the vessel than 

just the crewman who died. 

The report can be downloaded from www.aibn.no/Sjofart/Rapporter/2012-07-eng 

5  Fall Fatality during Platform Abandonment 

The  US  Department  of  the  Interior  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  Gulf  of  Mexico  outer 
continental shelf (OCS) region has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which an offshore employee 
was  fatally  injured  while  assisting  in  plugging  and  abandonment  of  a  well  and  decommissioning  a  production  platform.  The 
incident occurred at night; the worker, working at the top of the well, was dragged by a load into an exposed well-access 
opening in the deck, and fell to his death.  

Further information is available from http://www.bsee.gov/uploadedFiles/BSEE/Regulations/Safety_Alerts/SA-301.pdf 

 

