AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/07 

Safety Flash 

July 2007 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1 

 Diver Injury Using Cavitation Blaster 

A  member  has  reported  that  a  diver  sustained  a  high  pressure  water  injection  injury  whilst  using  a  recently  developed 
4500 psi cavitation water blaster. 

Cavitation gun 

 

 
Retro jet showing proximity of nozzle 

to end of baffle (approx 3 cm) 

During marine growth removal operations the diver released the trigger on the cavitation gun to reposition his body.  When 
the diver reapplied pressure to the trigger, the cavitation gun kicked back towards the diver, causing the retro end of the gun 
to come into close proximity of his wrist and forearm.  The retro jet subsequently caused a high pressure (approximately 
1000 psi) seawater injection injury to the diver’s forearm. 

The injured diver was successfully treated with antibiotics at an onshore hospital facility and did not require surgery. 

The risk assessment had not highlighted the fact that the retro jet posed a high pressure injection risk to the diver. 

The  incident  investigation  discovered  that  the  diver  had  not  been  wearing  the  11  inch  long  butyl  rubber  gloves  as 
recommended by the system manufacturer but it was unclear if wearing these would have prevented the injury. 

The  manufacturer  has  now modified  the  retro jet by moving  the nozzle  further back  inside  the  rear  baffle.   The  company 
involved will be carrying out a full examination of the modification before allowing the cavitation blaster back into use. 

Members are reminded of the IMCA guidance document AODC 049 – Code of practice for the use of high pressure water jetting 
equipment by divers. 

2  Weld Failure on Kirby Morgan KM17B 505-055 Neck Clamp 

A member has reported that a weld on an eight-year-old Kirby Morgan neck clamp arrangement has failed. 

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems has indicated to the company that this may have been caused by either inadequate bead build-up 
on the weld or crevice corrosion. 

In either case Kirby Morgan Dive Systems stated that underwater, this failure would not cause a catastrophic failure resulting 
in injury or death. 

 

It  also  stated  that  this  deficiency  would  be  detected  during  the  daily  pre-  or  post-dive  checks  providing  proper  pre-  and 
post-dive checks were being done and that there was no sure way to prevent failures of any component.  However, proper 
maintenance and inspection would in most cases identify problems before they become dangerous. 

Two relevant bulletins issued by Kirby Morgan Dive Systems in 2000 and 2003 are attached. 

These notices with other safety-related information are also available on the company’s website at www.kirbymorgan.com 

KIRBY  MORGAN

TM

DIVING SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL, Inc.

425 Garden Street

Santa Barbara, California  93101

Telephone (805) 965-8538 Fax (805) 966-5761

Email: DivSysIntl@aol.com

Maintenance & Repair  Bulletin 1 of 2000:

SL 17 A/B & MK 21 Neck clamp

 Feb. 2000

Inscribed
"S" on top
or bottom
of pin in
this area.

Subject:
SL 17 A/B & MK 21 Neck clamp
Predive Inspection
Products Affected:
All SL 17 A/B & MK 21
Yoke/Neck Clamp Assemblies

The  neck  clamp  assembly,  like  all  other  mechanical
parts,  will  wear  over  time,  thus  requiring  routine
maintenance and eventual replacement. DSI strongly
recommends that all Kirby Morgan SuperLite-17 A/B
/ MK 21 Neck Clamp Assemblies be carefully inspected
for signs of damage and wear at least semi-annually and
checked  daily  for  proper  adjustment  prior  to
commencement of dive operations. Worn or damaged
neck  clamps  and  especially  those  damaged  from
improper adjustment pose a potentially serious safety
hazard  to  the  user.  All  neck  clamp  assemblies  will
eventually become worn to a point where they must be
replaced. Proper routine inspection should reveal wear
and damage before it becomes a danger to the user.

In April of 1999 DSI started embossing all new neck
clamp  assemblies  with  the  date  of  manufacture  and
identification number. All newly manufactured neck
clamps undergo inspection and testing in accordance
with  AWS  Standard  D1.1.  Prior  to  this  date,  neck
clamps were built to an engineering drawing and were
not subjected to the ANSI/AWS standard. DSI continues
to  use  the  same  engineering  drawings  but  has
additionally adopted the ANSI/AWS standard to help
ensure highest quality control.

© Diving Systems International, All Rights Reserved                                                                    Document # 000201001

Page 1 of 3

KIRBY  MORGAN

TM

DSI recommends a maximum service life of five years for neck clamps that are used in harsh environments (i.e.
welding, cutting, and burning, contaminated waters) or other practices that can degrade the metal components of
the neck clamp. These clamps should be visually inspected prior to each dive as part of the pre-dive check of the
helmet. This pre-dive inspection is done with the neck dam fabric/rubber in place. All neck clamps should be
visually inspected at least on a semi-annual basis in detail with the neck dam fabric removed so all welds can be
visually inspected for signs of cracking or damage. Neck clamps kept in service after 5 years should be inspected
more  frequently.  Additionally,  the  three  pins  and  clevis  welds  should  be  carefully  inspected,  as  well  as  the
adjustment stud. All metal parts should be carefully inspected for signs of wear or damage. The stainless nylon
lock nut will wear out over time and will require replacement. If any other metal components appear worn or
damaged the neck clamp must be replaced. This inspection is considered the minimum. The use of other non-
destructive test methods such as dye penetrant testing can be used to validate suspected damage.

Neck clamp assemblies which are bent or deformed due to misadjustment or accidental damage may be returned
to DSI, via your local dealer, for possible repair. Users must keep in mind that there are limits to restoring used
or abused parts. DSI uses a fixture that resembles the bottom of a SL 17A/B to adjust all new neck clamps and this
same fixture can often be used to reshape bent or deformed neck clamps. If there is any question regarding the
condition of the neck clamp, don't use it. Suspected worn or damaged neck clamp assemblies should be taken to
a DSI dealer to be sent on to DSI for a factory inspection.

The  following  procedure  is  designed  to  help  identify  degradation  of  neck  clamp  components  before  the
degradation poses a threat to the user. It should be preformed daily before the start of dive operations or any time
that the diver is changed. This is especially true if each diver does not have his or her own neck dam/yoke assembly.
Diving Systems highly recommends that a neck dam/yoke assembly for each diver or at least of each neck dam
size be available during dive operations with multiple divers using the same helmet. An ill fitting, wrong size neck
dam can pose a serious hazzard to the diver. Also, a backup neck dam yoke assembly is insurance against down
time due to a damaged neck clamp.

Neck  Clamp  and  Yoke  Assembly
Pre-Dive  Inspection: (Refer  to  the
illustrations for reference).

Visually inspect the moving parts of the
clamp assembly including the three pins (A)
in  the  over-center  lever  assembly,  and  the
three clevis blocks. Visually inspect for bent or
broken pins or a bent or broken handle and locking
bail (B).

Check to ensure the adjustment stud (C) is not bent or
damaged. Visually inspect the welded area (D) around the
base of the stud for signs of stress or weld cracking.

© Diving Systems International, All Rights Reserved                                                                    Document # 000201001

Page 2 of 3

KIRBY  MORGAN

TM

On the Yoke, check that the screws (1) holding the
Latch Catch Assembly are tight. Check to ensure the
latch catch mechanism functions smoothly. Ensure
the safety pin is present and attached by a lanyard.

Check  to  make  sure  the  rear  hinge  tab  is  secured
tightly to the clamp foundation. This can be checked
by wiggling the yoke back and forth sideways (M) to
ensure it and the hinge are securely tightened to the
hinge tab and the hinge tab is secured to the clamp.
If there is a slop in this movement, first check to
ensure the brass hinge is firmly attached to the yoke
assembly  (2)  and  the  two  bolts  (3)  are  installed
securely  to  the  brass  hinge.  If  these  are  tight,  the
hinge tab to clamp screws may be loose. To tighten
these  screws  you  must  remove  the  two  bolts  (3)
holding the brass hinge to the clamp and remove the
yoke & hinge from the clamp. The screws may be
accessed by pushing the neck dam neoprene (4) to
the side. After tightening the screws, remount the
yoke  &  hinge  using  the  two  bolts.  You  must  use
Locktite® on the bolts (3) when reinstalling them.

Check the condition of the neoprene or rubber neck
dam for wear and deterioration, replace if necessary.

Check  fit  and  adjustment  of  the  neck  clamp  by
installing the clamp on the helmet, ensuring that the
clamp is seated properly over the o-ring area of the
helmet. When closing the lever, the lever should get
tight at the mid-point of travel, and once the lever is
past the mid-point of travel, the clamp should close
easily. DO NOT FORCE THE CLAMP SHUT! If it
does not close as described, you MUST adjust the
clamp by loosening the adjustment locking nut (E).
From the closed position if you pull out on the lever
approximately  1-2  inches,  the  lever  should  snap
closed when released.

As the neck dam ages it compresses and the clamp
must be adjusted by tightening the adjustment locking
nut  (E)  so  that  the  clamp  operates  as  described
above.

The  stainless  steel  nylon  lock  nut  (E)  will  require
periodic replacement as the nylon insert wears out due
to the periodic adjustments to the clamp that MUST be
made as the neck dam ages or you change to a dry suit
mount. YOU SHOULD NEVER HAVE TO FORCE
THE CLAMP SHUT!
Proper adjustment of the neck clamp should place the
bail squarely in the groove of the latch catch body
when the clamp is closed.

© Diving Systems International, All Rights Reserved                                                                    Document # 000201001

Page 3 of 3

I R B Y MORGA

N

K

D

I

V

ESYST E M S ,

I nc.

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc.®

425 Garden Street, Santa Barbara, California  93101

 Phone:  805/965-8538     Fax:  805/966-5761
www.KMDSI.com   e-mail: info@KMDSI.com

Safety Notice 1 of 2003:

SL 17 A/B & MK 21 Neck clamp

 28 Aug. 2003

Subject: Neck Clamp Assembly
KMDSI Part # 505-055 (and pre '89 505-003)

Products Affected:  Kirby Morgan SuperLite-17A/B & U.S. Navy MK-21 Mod. O
& Mod. I Helmets

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc. (KMDSI) was
alerted by its Authorized Dealer in Southern Africa
about the following incident: A Kirby Morgan Su-
perLite 17A/B (Serial #82929, purchased in April
1997) neck clamp assembly was found jammed in
a container door. The neck clamp was hanging on
the umbilical rack on the door and the person clos-
ing  the  container  door  did  not  notice  that  it  was
jammed. When the jammed neck clamp was dis-
covered,  it  was  removed  and  closely  inspected.
During the clamping process (onto the helmet) one of the welded pins on the neck clamp assembly
broke off. On closer inspection it was noted that there was no way of identifying this potential break as
both sides of the pin are welded.

It is important that a visual inspection of the neck clamp assembly be done before every dive. Normal
inspection of the neck clamp assembly is covered in the Kirby Morgan Daily Pre-Dive inspection Ap-
pendixes A2.3, Monthly Inspection A2.2 and the Annual / 400 Hour Overhaul A2.1. These Appendixes
can  be  found  at  <http://www.kirbymorgan.com/>www.kirbymorgan.com  under  notices/maintenance
checklists.

The Annual/400 hour Overhaul has the technician remove the clamp from the yoke and neck dam so that
all the component surfaces are revealed for inspection.  The monthly Inspection check has the techni-
cian checking all welds and checking the entire clamp adjustment stud by loosening the lock nut and
exposing the entire stud.  This check is not as complete as the annual but is considered adequate if done
monthly.  Neck clamps older than five years should be inspected weekly in accordance with Appendix
A2.2 steps 1-6 and daily in accordance with Appendix A2.3 Daily Pre-Dive Set up and Inspection steps
1.1-1.2. Anytime neck clamps are used on different helmets the neck clamp must be checked for proper
function, fit and adjustment prior to diving.

  © 2003  Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc All Rights Reserved.    Doc #030828010

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc.®

425 Garden Street, Santa Barbara, California  93101

Phone:  805/965-8538     Fax:  805/966-5761

www.KMDSI.com   e-mail: info@KMDSI.com

I R B Y MORGA

N

K

D

I

V

ESYST E M S ,

I nc.

Over the years, KMDSI has upgraded and enhanced the SuperLite® 17 A/B,
MK 21 neck clamp assembly. Enhancements include not only more stringent
inspections, but reinforcements in critical areas as well as changing materials
to aid in the reduction of oxidizing. Since April, 1999 KMDSI has inscribed
every SuperLite® 17 A/B, MK21 neck clamp with date of manufacture and
an identification number.

April 2004 will be five years since the inception of inscribed neck clamps. If
your neck clamp is not inscribed, it is older than five years and KMDSI strongly
recommends that the neck clamp be inspected on a weekly basis in accor-
dance with SuperLite 17 A/B monthly helmet inspection Appendix A2.2 pro-
cedures 1 – 6.

Any Neck Clamp Assembly that does not pass inspection and is not repairable
should be destroyed so that there is no chance of it being used by accident or
negligence.

This inspection sheet as well as all Kirby Morgan helmet and masks inspec-
tion and maintenance check lists can be found on our web site
http://www.kirbymorgan.com/   under notices/maintenance checklists.

All metal parts should be inspected for cracks or corrosion and replaced immediately if this type of damage is found.
While some surface rust or corrosion is to be expected, severe corrosion can lead to the eventual failure of the part.

If any part doesn't look right, don't use it.

  © 2003  Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc All Rights Reserved.    Doc #030828010

