AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/04 

October 2004 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Possible Choking Incident – Diver’s Helmet 

Keywords: Helmet 

While performing a task during a saturation dive, a man inhaled a 45mm diameter neoprene component from a diving helmet.  
The component has been identified by the supplier as a ‘comfort pad’, which had been installed to protect the diver’s face 
from abrasion and cold. 

Oral-nasal 
for review 

lifted 

Comfort pad 

 

As can be seen in the photograph the part is located on top of the retaining nut at the bottom of the oral nasal piece, in close 
proximity to the diver’s mouth.  In this incident a choking incident was avoided as the part was caught in the diver’s teeth 
during inhalation.  The cause of the detachment appears to have been a loss of bonding from the adhesive which attaches the 
two components. 

The supplier of the helmet was notified and they have advised that a ‘Correct Memo’ is to be issued to the manufacturer 
ASAP.  The manufacturer advised the application of an approved wet suit cement to reattach the pad. 

The  company  concerned  advised  the  supplier  that  the  component  was  not  listed  on  the  parts  list,  nor  mentioned  in  the 
checklist in the product manual.  The relevant section however, although not specific to the component in question, gives 
clear instruction as to the preparation prior to the donning of the hat.  The first statement is as follows: 

“The helmet should be checked thoroughly before each mission.  This should be done well in advance of the dive in order to be able to 
carry out any repairs or adjustments that may be necessary”. 

In close proximity to the relevant part in the manual, the instructions state:  

“Check that the oral-nasal mask (44), the nose block device (43), and the oral-nasal retainer (121) are properly attached.” 

The company concerned is in contact with the supplier and manufacturers of the equipment, and there may be a following 
note  to  advise  of  progress.    The  company  has  recommended  that  close  scrutiny  is  given  to  checking  this  part  and  other 

 

Keywords: Lifting  

similar components prior to every dive.  It has advised its crews that a spare nut with the pad attached will be made available 
for quick turn-a-rounds should this be required. 

2  Pipe Handling Frame Incident During Diving Operation  

A member has reported an incident while a pipe handling frame (PHF) was being lowered to a depth of 100 metres from a 
barge using its starboard crane when a shift change was in process onboard.  At the same time, a diving bell was at the depth 
of 155 metres, 25 metres away from the descending PHF area. 

A diver left the bell and went to the seabed (depth 169 metres) and proceeded to the location of a flange to perform his 
task.  This put him approximately 40 metres away in the direction of the descending PHF. 

As the diver was moving towards the flange, he noticed cloud of ‘muck’ 2 metres away from him. 

He  immediately  stopped  and  informed  his  supervisor.    In  the  process,  he  made  physical  contact  with  the  PHF,  which  had 
settled half on the pipeline and the seabed. 

No injuries was sustained to the diver or damage done to the 30” pipeline. 

 

The member has noted the following related points: 

  at the time of the incident, a shift change was in process; 

 

 

 

the PHF dimension was 5.60m 5.20m 2.50m, its weight in air 18 tons and its weight in water 16.5 tons; 

the PHF was being lowered at a speed which was disabling the transponder needed to update the survey system; 

the transponder used to monitor the lowering and rising of loads and crane wires malfunctioned (sending intermittent 
signals). 

The following investigation reached the following conclusions: 

  The  diving  supervisor  taking  over  shift  and  managing  the  subsequent  lock-out  of  the  diver  could  not  reasonably  be 
expected to know the situation of the PHF, other than that it was as planned, without another person informing him of 
any subsequent change, i.e. the deck foreman or the survey operator; 

  The  action  to  over-board  the  PHF  and  ‘park  it’  at  100m  until  the  supervisor  could  take  control  was  a  sensible  and 

  The  fact  that  the  PHF  was  not  parked  at  100m  should  have  been  noted  and  passed  to  the  supervisor  by  the  crane 

prudent administration strategy; 

operator and the survey team. 

  The diving supervisor should have verified the position of the PHF prior to locking out the diver.  Instead, he relied on 

the crane operator and the survey systems to manage the position of the PHF. 

  The diving supervisor was negligent in locking out the diver and progressing the diver to the work location with the PHF 

suspended at the proposed 100m level. 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

 

 

3  Uncontrolled Decompression During Gangway Move 

Keywords:  Pressure 

A member has reported that a man-way trunk and its adjacent entry lock on a hyperbaric chamber were depressurised to 
surface when a fitting on the man-way was struck by a gangway.  The system was pressurised to 270fsw and vented to the 
surface in ten minutes through a ¼” penetrator.  The system held four divers in saturation. 

The were no injuries and, other than the fitting, no further damage was caused. 

Initial findings of the investigation are that: 

the trunk fitting was unprotected from direct contact with the gangway; 

the crew had lost control of the gangway while raising it to allow a materials barge alongside; 

there had been a valve on the internal aspect of the trunk, but this had not been secured after the valve was hit; 

the loss of pressure in the adjacent entry lock was attributable to a misalignment of the chamber inner door, which was 
immediately and easily realigned following the incident. 

Temporary barricade 

Gangway 

Valve location 

 

The potential for a less benign outcome for this incident was significant.  Investigations are ongoing and the company will be 
issuing an internal memorandum on the issues surrounding this incident. 

In  the  meantime,  it  has  passed  this  alert  to  IMCA  as  a  ‘heads  up’  and  a  reminder  that  to  expect  and  prepare  for  the 
unexpected is good advice.  The company has asked all of its dive team members to scrutinise the arrangement of similar 
fittings  on  other  diving  spreads  and  to  report  any  results  which  could  predict  the  occurrence  of  a  similar  incident.  
Any proposed system modifications will then go through the company’s management-of-change process. 

  hyperbaric evacuation systems and other dive equipment on deck should be adequately protected from being struck by 

Particular points to be noted are: 

other objects; 

  all internal doors within a hyperbaric system should be aligned properly. 

