AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/14 

Safety Flash 

    July 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Failure of Master Link during Subsea Lifting Operations    

An incident has been brought to IMCA’s attention in which a master link (lifting ring) fitted to a 10t air lift bag failed in use 
during subsea lifting. This style of master links are also fitted to 10t water load bags. 

 

 

Showing the overall size of the master link, and the part number embossed on the flat section 

 

Unique Seaflex has identified the batch number of the parted master link. However, as these links are interchangeable, as a 
precaution, the company has decided to advise all owners or users of 10t air lift bags and 10t water load bags to inspect the 
master links fitted to their bags and quarantine any products marked with the following two possible lot numbers (which can 
be found embossed within the pressed section opposite the weld in the centre of one long side):  

♦ 

IWA; 

♦  LWA 

 
Members using 10t air lift bags or 10t water load bags fitted with a red master link marked IWA or LWA should contact Ian 
Margham  at  ian.margham@uniquegroup.com  for  further  information  in  regards  to  ring  change-out  and  replacement 
instructions. 

Members may wish to consult the following similar safety flashes: 

IMCA SF 12/11 Incident: 1 – Offshore tank container rigging failure; 

IMCA SF 07/14 Incident: 6 – Master link and sub-link failure on lifting equipment.  

♦ 

♦ 

2  LTI – Hand Severed During Mooring Operations 

An incident has come to IMCA’s attention in which a crewman lost his right hand during mooring operations. The incident 
occurred  when  a  service  vessel  was  moving  floating  hoses  away  from  an  incoming  tanker  (a  routine  procedure)  using  soft 
‘pick up ropes’ attached to each hose. Members of the deck crew and Bosun picked up and secured the first pick up rope.  
They had  difficulty in securing the second hose. The Chief Mate (the  injured party) came down from bridge  and physically 
took over the job. He held the pick-up rope close to the ‘panama eye’ of the vessel with his arm through the eye of the rope. 
A sudden sea swell tightened the rope.  His right hand was caught against the hard edge of the panama eye, and severed.  

Showing elbow linked through pick up rope soft eye 

Showing pick-up rope (re-enactment) 

Investigation identified the following root causes: 

♦  The Chief Mate ‘stepping down’ to crew task without preparation; 

♦  A potential high consequence hazard was not recognised; 

 

 

 

 

♦  The injured person did not follow accepted practice of seamanship for handling mooring lines; 

♦  Others  who  might  have  challenged  him  and  stopped  the  job  were  hindered  by  cultural  norms  regarding  challenges  to 

formal lines of authority. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: mooring, hand): 

IMCA SF 02/08 Incident: 1 – Finger injury whilst casting off towing line; 

IMCA SF 07/12 Incident: 3 – Two recent cases of hand and arm injuries; 

IMCA SF 16/13 Incident: 4 – LTI: Crewman injured foot during offshore renewables mooring operation. 

Members  are  reminded  to  encourage  personnel  to  look  after  their  hands  and  arms.  IMCA  produces  a  range  of  safety 
promotional material on hand and arm safety, as well as a poster on mooring safety: 

IMCA SPC 08 – Watch your hands: you’ve only got one set 

IMCA SPC 11 – Stay safe at the wheel - Cutting and grinding safety  

IMCA SPC 16 – Caught between and pinch points: What you should know and a poster IMCA SPP 09 – Watch out for pinch 
points 

♦  MCA SPC 17 – Hand-arm vibration: Control the risks 

♦ 

IMCA SPP 12 – Mooring safety 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

 
3  LTI - Severe Hand Injury in Galley 

An incident has come to IMCA’s attention in which a member of the galley staff sustained severe injuries. The individual was 
grinding tomatoes when his arm got trapped in the feeder tube of a meat grinder machine. His colleagues freed him from the 
machine and transported him to the onsite clinic in a private vehicle. The victim received immediate treatment at the onsite 
clinic. When he was stabilised, he was transferred to a local hospital. During emergency surgery at the hospital his right hand 
had to be amputated. 

 

Showing INCORRECT set-up with no plunger or top tray 

Showing CORRECT set-up with plunger and top tray 

 

The on-going and as yet incomplete investigation has revealed the following: 

♦  The equipment was not properly configured for safe use – see photographs; 

♦  All the necessary guards were not in place; 

♦  The machine was being operated by someone who was not fully familiar with how to operate it; 

♦  The machine was not being used for the purpose for which it was intended. 

The following toolbox talk/safety meeting points were suggested: 

♦  What kind of machinery is there in your galley or catering facility that could cause harm;  

♦  Are these machines being operated safely? Are all the necessary guards in place and functional; 

♦  Are the cooks and galley staff trained and competent to use the machines properly and safely; 

♦ 

Is there anything that can be done to further improve galley safety;  

♦  Are your emergency response procedures adequate to deal with an injury of this sort. 

Members  may  wish  to  refer  to  the  following  similar  incidents  (key  words:  hand,  finger,  guard,  removed,  galley).  All  of  these 
incidents except the final one have as a cause, failure to have physical safeguards in place to avoid finger or hand injuries. 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 06/01 Incident: 3 – Use of hand-held disc grinders; 

IMCA SF 03/05 Incident: 2 – Injury while grinding without PPE;  

IMCA SF 07/12 Incident: 1 – LTI – Incident with circular saw leads to loss of thumb;  

IMCA SF 05/13 Incident 4 – Finger and hand injury [in the galley]. 

Members may wish to make use of the IMCA DVD  ‘Slips, trips and finger nips’ and  also the IMCA pocket card ‘Watch your 
hands’ www.imca-int.com/media/102527/imcaspc08.pdf.  

 
4  Near Miss: Collapse of ROV Launch & Recovery System (LARS)   

A member has reported an incident in which a launch and recovery system (LARS) collapsed causing damage to the sheave, 
snubber  and  LARS  deck  plates.  The  incident  occurred  during  the  demobilisation  of  an  ROV  spread.  A  Lawson  type  ROV 
LARS ‘A’ frame was required to be lowered into its stowage position and lifted from the vessel onto the quayside. During 
this process the ‘A’ frame collapsed.  

During  the  disassembly  of  the  LARS,  existing  company  procedures  were  not  consulted  by  the  ROV  team.  As  a  result,  an 
ROV supervisor attempted to lower the ‘A’ frame with his own perceived method, and subsequently the ‘A’ frame fell in an 
uncontrolled manner to the deck. The method of lowering one supporting hydraulic ram at a time whilst the other is firmly 
bolted into place was not followed. The supervisor removed all the securing bolts from the feet of both the hydraulic rams, 
believing the system would  gently slide  down into the stowage position. To  aid the initial movement of the rams, the two 
supervisors stood on the LARS platform and started striking the feet with a sledge hammer, one ram at a time. Once the first 
ram  moved  approx.  13cm,  they  then  struck  the  second  ram  which  resulted  in  the  ‘A’  frame  collapsing  at  speed.  Both 
supervisors  were  extremely  fortunate  that  they  were  not  struck  by  the  falling  ‘A’  frame  -  they  were  unharmed,  but  this 
incident had the potential for serious injury/loss of life. 

 

 

‘A’ frame in final position after collapse – showing where bolts 

Position of the two supervisors after ‘A’ frame collapse  

were removed from feet of hydraulic rams 

NB: Actual worksite after event. Yellow arrow denotes direction in which ‘A’ frame collapsed 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

♦  An important opportunity to STOP the job was missed – an able seaman not involved in the operation asked the ROV 
team  if  they  would  like  the  assistance  of  the  vessel  crane  to  support  the  ‘A’  frame  during  the  lowering  process.  He 
explained that he had seen this done before during other demobilisations and the process the ROV team were using did 
not seem safe. His advice was not taken - If in doubt STOP the job; 

♦  No  proper  control  of  work  –  no  toolbox  talk,  risk  assessment,  method  statement  or  hazard  identification  and  risk 

assessment (HIRA); 

♦  Procedures were not followed; 

♦  Poor hazard awareness and poor risk perception of the task; 

♦ 

Insufficient management and control of the work; 

♦  Poor supervision and poor leadership at the work site; 

♦ 

Incomplete technical understanding of the equipment;  

♦  Personnel were not competent for the task in hand. 

Our  member  reflected  that  the  reoccurrence  of  dropped  object  incidents  throughout  its  fleet  is  evidence  that  dropped 
objects  are  still  harming  and  have  the  potential  to  kill.  This  incident  could  have  been  averted  if  the  procedures  had  been 
followed and the basic safety management tools used to control the works. Active supervision of the work site and control 
of works by the vessel management is vitally important to ensure safe operations are conducted at all times. 

Members can find many incidents in which the immediate and root causes are inadequate control of work, procedures not 
followed  etc.  Likewise  there  are  many  dropped  object  incidents,  and  a  number  of  dissimilar  incidents  involving  ROVs  or 

 
LARS. It is possible that this incident, in which basic failure to follow common safety procedures led to a serious dropped 
object near miss involving very heavy equipment, may be without precedent amongst recorded safety flashes.   

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incident in which the root causes identified included: 

♦  The potential of falling objects was not recognised or identified as a foreseeable and  significant risk; 

♦  Work instructions were not followed; 

♦  There was a lack of situational awareness.  

IMCA SF 15/13 Incident: 1 – LTI: dropped object incident. 

5  Hydraulic Hose Failure Caused Collapse of Heavy Haulage Trailer 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  low  loader  collapsed  at  the  quayside  while  carrying  a  157t  suction  pile. 
Suction piles (16m x 6m, 157t) were being transported to the quayside upending and storage area. The piles had previously 
been received at the site and moved from the quayside to their respective storage locations without incident using the heavy 
haulage  trailer.  Around  20  suction  piles  had  been  delivered  to  the  support  base  and  positioned  in  the  storage  areas.  In 
readiness  for  mobilisation  and  offshore  installation  the  suction  piles  were  to  be  moved  to  an  area  close  to  the  quayside 
before being up ended (positioned vertically).  

Whilst  the  trailer  was  moving  at  a  slow  walking  speed  along  the  quayside,  one  of  its hydraulic  hoses  burst.  The  hose  was 
located near the rear of the trailer. This caused a loss of hydraulic pressure which caused the trailer to sink on the nearside 
which  in  turn  made  the  load  lower  toward  the  quay.  The  wheels  on  the  trailer’s  offside  lifted  clear  of  the  ground 
approximately 20cm and on the nearside of the trailer the suction pile saddles made contact with the concrete. 

Following the incident the crawler cranes that were to offload at the upending area were tracked to the location and used to 
stabilise the load prior to levelling out the trailer (suspension on offside lowered). The trailer was then moved clear and the 
load transported to the upending area on the cranes.  

Suction pile after hose failure 

Damaged hose 

 

 

The following lessons were learnt: 

♦  The  hydraulic  hose  that  failed  was  located  behind  the  wheel  arch  running  along  the  chassis  of  the  trailer;  it  was  quite 

inaccessible for regular cleaning, inspection and maintenance;  

♦  The  location  of  the  hose  was  considered  a  ‘dirt  trap’  which  is  considered  likely  to  have  led  to  its  deterioration  and 

subsequent failure;  

♦  The critical nature of this hose was not understood, and it was not recognised that failure could cause the trailer to list;  

♦  As a consequence of the above, no hose inspection or change out frequency had been specified; 

♦  The potential for failure of the suspension to cause the load to list was not considered at the risk assessment. 

The incident highlights the need for suppliers and operators of specialist equipment to determine fully the potential critical 
failures  of  equipment  and  take  preventative  measures  accordingly.  Such  failures  should  also  be  considered  as  part  of  risk 
assessments and, where appropriate, additional controls and required recovery measures agreed prior to the operation. 

 
Members may wish to consider the following points when planning similar operations: 

♦  Check planned inspection and maintenance systems of equipment – are critical items considered; 

♦  Risk assessments – are potential failures and effects considered and assessed; 

♦  Consider pre-use checks of similar trailers – can a test to working pressure be conducted prior to loading. 

After  much  searching  using  various  key  words,  it  can  be  established  that  whilst  there  are  a  number  of  incidents  involving 
hydraulic hose failure, and any number of incidents in which the amongst the causes identified were failure to identify risks, this 
incident combining the two is without precedent in the IMCA safety flash system. 

6 

Inadequate Snap Hooks on Life Jackets 

The United States Coast Guard (USCG) has published the following safety flash regarding potentially inadequate snap hooks 
on certain brands of lifejacket. The USCG recommends that owners/operators that have Revere model 198 RT or 160 RT 
lifejackets or vests on board their vessels inspect them closely for this potential defect. 

For further information please refer to http://wow.uscgaux.info/Uploads_wowII/P-DEPT/0414_snaphook.pdf. 

