Safety Flash 

 November 2016 

IMCA Safety Flash 30/16 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

This safety flash has no central theme, but allows publication of a number of incidents outstanding, that do not fit 
into the themes of recent and forthcoming flashes. 

1 

Fatal Fall from Tug Svitzer Moira 

The  UK  Marine  Accident  Investigation  Branch  (MAIB)  has  published  a  report  into  a  fatal  accident  when  a  crew 
member fell and was crushed as the tug Svitzer Moira was being manoeuvred alongside an unmanned tug at Royal 
Portbury Dock, Bristol, on 29 December 2015. 

The MAIB summary highlights the following key issues: 

  No toolbox talk took place – the job was deemed as routine by the crew and assumptions were made.  A toolbox 
talk, prior to any hazardous task, is a good opportunity for all crew to have an input, and to ensure all share the 
same common goal; 

  The engineer was not wearing the appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) at the time of this tragic 

accident, though it is unlikely that its use would have changed the outcome; 

  The investigation found shortcomings in the oversight and control of deck operations and lapses in the use of 
PPE, indicative of a significant divergence between company instructions and working practices on board that 
had not been corrected by shore management. 

The full report can be downloaded here. 

2 

LTI: Eye Injury Following Incident with Microwaved Food  

A member has reported an incident in which someone suffered an eye injury following being hit in the face by food 
taken from a microwave oven.  The incident occurred when 
a  crew  member  reheated  pre-cooked  poached  eggs  by 
covering them in water in a bowl covered with pierced cling 
film  and  heating  in  a  microwave  oven.    The  eggs  were 
reheated at two cycles of two minutes at 900W of power and 
then removed from the oven.  Approximately a minute after 
removal from microwave, the contents of the bowl blew up 
into the person’s face.  Despite the wearing of prescription 
safety  glasses  (see  photo)  and  the  prompt  action  of  an 
adjacent  crew  member  in  applying  copious  amounts  of  cold  water,  a  resultant  burn  to  the  eye  necessitated  a 
medevac for assessment and further treatment onshore. 

 

 

 
Fortunately the burns, although painful, healed rapidly and the injured person was able to return to work after two 
weeks. 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following contributory factors: 

  Although the reheating of pre-cooked poached eggs occurred frequently, there was no standard method or 

written instructions for doing so; 

  The ‘normal’ method of immersing the eggs in several changes of hot water was not universally understood; 

  The warnings in the microwave oven instruction book regarding the heating of poached eggs was not heeded 

(the yolk has to be pierced before heating); 

  There were no warning signs posted on or adjacent to the microwave oven; 

  Familiarisation training for new crew did not include the use of this equipment; 

  There was poor perception of the risks inherent in the use of a microwave oven; 

  There was no recognition of it being ‘work equipment’.  As a consequence, no importance was attached to a 
suitable  or  sufficient  risk  assessment  for  the  microwave  oven  or  any  other  pantry  equipment,  or  to  risk 
assessment for associated pantry/mess-room tasks not part of the normal professional operation of the galley. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: microwave): 

 

 IMCA SF 01/00 – Incident 5 – Microwaving water. 

3 

Scalding Injury to Crew Member 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published a safety alert about an incident in which a crewman on a vessel 
suffered scalding injuries to his arms.  The incident occurred during topping up of the cooling system of the main 
engines. 

On  the  day  before  the  incident,  main  engine  cooling  water  tests  were  conducted  in  line  with  the  planned 
maintenance system.  These tests showed a need to top up the chemicals in the cooling water of three of the four 
main engines. 

On the morning of the  incident  the  injured person, an engine  cadet, was  working under  the  supervision of the 
second engineer.  He was tasked with topping up the chemicals in the cooling system of the main engines.  Two of 
the three engines requiring top up were completed, after which the injured person was sent to continue a painting 
task he had previously been given. 

At 12:00 the vessel was called in to work near the installation they were attending – at the same time there was a 
shift change and the third engineer took over watch keeping duties.  The appropriate list of checks was completed 
and the vessel was alongside the installation ready to work at 12:42, with all four engines on line. 

At  13:15  the  injured  person  returned  from  lunch  and  informed  the  third  engineer  that  he  had  completed  the 
painting  task  assigned  to  him  earlier  in  the  day,  and  asked  if  there  were  other  tasks  that  needed  completing.  
The third engineer, keen to clear the outstanding planned maintenance, asked that the injured person complete 
the topping up of the cooling system on the remaining engine.  The injured person accepted the task and proceeded 
to the engine room.  The engines on board had a lower temperature and a higher temperature header tank.  Both 
required topping up. 

At approximately 13:19, he removed the cap from the high temperature header tank on main engine no. 3.  As the 
engine was running, the removal of the cap released 90°C water at 7 psi, spraying it across both forearms of the 
cadet, causing second degree burns to both arms. 

First  aid  treatment  was  given on  board.    Following medical  advice  from  shore  side  medical  support,  the  vessel 
diverted to port to send the injured person to hospital for further treatment.  Subsequent to that further hospital 
treatment he returned home the next morning to the care of his local doctor. 

 

 
The MSF safety alert identifies the following causes of the incident: 

  The third engineer, supervising the injured person, was on his first trip as a newly qualified officer.  He had had 
insufficient  time  for  thorough  familiarisation  before  starting  sole  watch  keeping  duties,  to  provide  the 
knowledge and experience of the vessel for him to be deemed genuinely competent in the operation of that 
vessel; 

  Given his lack of understanding and knowledge of the machinery on board, the third engineer was not aware 
that the cap must not be removed from the HT header tank whilst the engine was in operation or until cooled 
down following operations; 

  The injured person, being a cadet and having carried out the task previously, accepted without question that 
the task should be carried out whilst the engine was running and whilst the vessel was within the 500m zone. 

IMCA notes the importance of communication, particularly at shift and crew handover. 

The following corrective actions were identified by the MSF and the company submitting the incident: 

  All  new  joining  crew,  whether  recently  qualified  or  new  to  the  vessel,  should  be  given  time  for  thorough 

familiarisation of all aspects of their duties on board; 

  Assumptions should not be made that, because a newly qualified officer has passed his or  her Certificate of 
Competency, they are instantly competent to undertake unsupervised watch keeping.  An assessment should 
be made of the individual’s competence prior to transfer of such responsibility; 

  No maintenance should take place on machinery, either running or in standby mode, whilst in the 500m zone; 

  Cadets have the same authority and responsibilities to stop the job as all other crew members.  The purpose 

of cadetships is to learn and develop – if cadets are unsure, ask! 

  Consider the use of a warning sign (where not already present) to not release the filler cap when the engine is 

running and/or the coolant is hot. 

The full report can be found here. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: scalded): 

 

IMCA SF 22/16 – Incident 5 – Crewman badly scalded during tank cleaning. 

4  Near Miss: Hose Parted 

A member has reported an incident in which a hose parted.  The incident occurred whilst an anchor handling tug 
(AHT) was delivering deck cargo and fuel oil to a drill 
ship.  Crew noticed that the hose was fouled below 
the water line of the AHT.  Pumping was immediately 
stopped  and  the  hose  was  blown  down.    The  hose 
was  then  disconnected  from  the  vessel  manifold.  
An attempt  was  made  using  the  drill  ship  crane  to 
pick up the hose but this was unsuccessful.  The AHT 
tried to clear the hose by going closer to the drill ship.  
Attempts  were  made  to  use  both  the  AHT  vessel 
crane  and the drill ship crane  to free the hose, and 
while  this  was  happening,  the  hose  parted.    No  oil 
leak was observed. 

Our member noted the following: 

  Root  Cause:  Floatation  collars  were  missing  on 

the hose; 

  The parted hose could have fouled the ship’s propeller resulting in a dangerous situation; 

 

Lessons Learnt/Preventive Action: 

 

the length and condition of the hose should be checked before work starts 

  where necessary, floatation collars should be used on hoses 
  willingness to stop the job needs reiterating. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: hose, parted, fouled): 

IMCA SF 03/13 – Incident 3 – Bunkering hose cut by propeller; 

IMCA SF 04/14 – Incident 3 – Oil spill incident; 

IMCA SF 01/15 – Incident 7 – Unplanned release of 960 litres of hydraulic oil. 

5 

Life Jacket Maintenance 

The  United  States  Coast  Guard  (USCG)  has  published  marine  safety  alert 
No. 13/16  regarding  the  importance  of  routine  maintenance,  service,  and 
inspection of inflatable life jackets. 

The  safety  alert  reminds  all  users  of  inflatable  life  jacket  users  of  the 
importance  of  performing  periodic  maintenance  on  their  equipment.  
The USCG  notes  that  fatalities  have  been  documented  where  inflatable  life 
jackets have failed to inflate properly. 

Further information can be found here. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

