Safety Flash 

 July 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 17/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Summary 

Six of the seven incidents here are of the worst kind: they involve workers getting harmed.  Two falls from height 
resulting in lost time injuries (LTIs), are followed by two incidents of collapse.  In the first, a crewman collapsed 
whilst seasick, injuring himself in falling, and in the second, someone collapsed temporarily owing to dehydration 
in  hot  conditions.   The  fifth  incident  is  about  a  worker  who  suffered a  hand  injury  in  inappropriately managed 
rotating machinery.  The final two incidents involve workers suffering serious burns in the workplace following the 
failure of their employer to properly manage risk and provide safe systems of work. 

1 

Fall from Height – LTI 

What happened? 

On a vessel that was alongside, crew were engaged in 
offloading  equipment  from  below-decks  through  a 
series of hatches, when their supervisor lost his footing 
and fell through the hatches, falling 7m.  He was taken 
to hospital with a dislocated and fractured shoulder and 
a broken ankle.  The ankle injury required surgery, and 
physiotherapy over a number of months before he was 
fit to return to work. 

What went wrong? 

A portable barrier (two stanchions and length of chain) 
was put around the area to warn of a trip hazard.  This was because although it was 
closed, the hatch was not fully sea-fastened.  

Recovery to deck of the equipment could be conducted without use of the vessel 
crane, and the crew held a Toolbox Talk and Pre-Task Assessment before starting, 
to discuss the method of lifting between the two decks using two chain pulls joined 
together. 

Crew operating the chain pulls were stood inside the barriered off area, wearing fall 
arrest harness and inertia reel.  Their supervisor was on the upper main deck outside 
of the barriered off area.  As the equipment was being lifted using this technique, 
he  moved  to get a better look  at what was happening.  As he  did so, he  lost his 
footing and tipped forward toward the portable barrier stanchions and chain, and 
fell through the barrier and down the hatch.  

 

 

  Fall prevention barriers that were around the upper main deck hatch were not suitable or sufficient.  There was 

 
What were the causes of the incident?  Causal factors identified: 

insufficient robust barrier hardware available on board; 

  Several trip hazards existed around the area: 

  where the task was being carried out 
  where the Supervisor was standing 
  where the portable barrier was previously positioned – this was also close to the edge of the open upper 

main deck hatch; 

  The Supervisor was too close to open hatch hazards without sufficient fall protection; 

  visual obstruction prompted the Supervisor to move to get a better look at the activities he was supervising.  

In so doing he knocked against the portable barrier 

 

the supervisor lost his footing/balance close to the edge of the portable barrier and open deck hatches; 

  A generic or blanket Permit to Work was used for  the recovery/lifting of this equipment using a working at 

height/chain pull method, rather than a specific Permit to Work.  

What lessons were learnt? 

  Time spent discussing the lift in detail, may have detracted from proper review of the suitability of the existing 

barrier, and possibly divided attention over risks from the lift versus that from the fall;   

  Better management required of Permit to Work system for specific and non-routine tasks; 

  A  proper  review  of  the  barrier  previously  put  in  place,  and  its  adequacy  to  protect  against  falls  versus 

highlighting a potential trip hazard, seems to have been forgotten during the planning stages of the task; 

 

Lapses do happen – Comprehensive checklists to confirm specific actions required can help address potential 
lapses.  These checklists could be included in pre-task dynamic/situational assessment, and standard pre-start 
checks made within the Permit to Work process.  

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Fall through open hatch in walkway; 

  Dropped object fell from crane – Poor communication/lack of awareness/control of work. 

A yard worker fell 4m from the main deck to a mezzanine deck.  The injured worker suffered a compression fracture 
in his right ankle.  

2 

Fall from Height During Yard Visit 

What happened 

During  a  yard  visit,  pieces  of  grating  were  being 
manually lowered with a rope down through an opening 
on the main deck.  The opening on the main deck was 
barred  off  by  a  scaffold.    No  fall  protection  was 
requested by the people on the main deck.  

Two workers should have been  on  the main deck and 
two  on  the  mezzanine  deck.    The  workers  on  the 
mezzanine deck were wearing fall protection.  However, 
at the time of the incident there were three workers on 
the main deck, and one worker on the mezzanine deck. 

A  piece  of  grating  got  stuck  on  an  edge  on  the  main 
deck.  This was observed by a co-worker who happened 

 

 
to be nearby.  He intervened in the work operation.  The workers on deck shifted the grating about 15 centimetres.  
As the grating shifted, the new worker continued to hold onto it, lost his balance and fell.  

The injured worker was a part of the scaffolding team but was not a part of this planned operation.  He decided to 
help his co-worker.  He was wearing a fall arrester but did not clip into an anchor point. 

What went wrong? 

  Attitude and behaviour – the injured person and the work team showed lack of safety awareness; 

  Non-compliance with personal protective equipment (PPE) – the injured worker was wearing a fall arrester 
but  didn’t  clip on to  an  anchor  point.   Also,  whilst  the  gratings  were  usually  handled  manually,  there  were 
taglines attached, but these were not used;  

  Competence  and  experience  –  the  injured  worker  had  worked  as  a  scaffolder  at  the  yard  for  years,  had 
experience and training in scaffolding and working at height, and possessed competence certification.  All the 
work team including the injured person were experienced in working at height; 

 

Language – the injured worker spoke neither English nor Norwegian.  Translation was conducted by co-workers.  
This yard routinely employs foreign workers with limited or no skill in English, although laying down rules for 
sub-contractors on how such workers were to be deployed; 

  Teamwork/communication – the investigation team has not been able to conclude if the worker was asked to 
support, or if he intervened on his own initiative.  Different versions of the story have been raised in interviews; 

  Management and supervision – the work team was wrongly organised.  There were four workers in the work 
team, there were supposed to be two workers on the main deck and two workers on the mezzanine deck for 
this operation.  At the time of the incident there were three workers on the main deck, and only one worker 
on the mezzanine deck; 

  Safety systems – a Permit to Work and Toolbox Talk had been conducted, and the injured person had been a 
part of the toolbox talk (see earlier remark about language).  The foreman for this work considered it to be 
known to the work team, so no specific job safety analysis took place, and there was insufficient focus on the 
shipyards’  “We  Care”  safety  campaign,  as  supervisors  and  co-workers  did  not  pay  attention  to  the  injured 
person not using appropriate working at height equipment. 

What were the causes? 

 

Immediate cause: the injured worker rushed into a work situation he was not supposed to be a part of.  He did 
not consider the risk in the operation and did not secure his fall arrest to an anchor point; 

  Underlying causes of the Incident: the injured worker did not comply with working at height standards and did 

not pay attention to the risks in the work situation; 

  Root Causes: the investigation concluded that these were weaknesses in safety awareness and management 

of work in the actual situation. 

What lessons were learnt? 

  Ensure closer follow up of yard to ensure compliance to safety awareness; 

  Executive (high level)  commitment to  safety is  paramount  for building a strong safety culture –  particularly 

when multiple organizations are working together in a shipyard. 

Members may wish to review Guidance on safety in shipyards.  Members may also wish to review the following 
incidents: 

  Crewman falls down open hatchway during simultaneous operations; 

  Dropped object fell from crane – Poor communication/lack of awareness/control of work. 

 

 
3  Crewman Found Collapsed – Seasickness 

What happened? 

A  trainee  member  of  the  crew  was  found  lying  unconscious  on  the  deck  between  two 
cement  tanks.    In  falling  his  left  arm  had twisted  under  him  but  there  were  no signs of 
physical injury at the time.  The injured person suffered partial immobility of the left hand 
as a result of how he fell.  

He  was  taken  to  the  on-board  doctor  for  medical  attention.    During  subsequent 
consultation between platform and vessel doctors it was decided to send him ashore for 
further assessment. 

Medical  assessment  ashore  found  the  injured  person  suffering  from  acute  oedema 
(swelling) over spinal discs C3, C4, C5.  The injured person is known to be recovering under 
continued medical treatment and he is able to move his left upper limb and movement at 

left shoulder joint and left elbow without restriction. 

What went wrong?  What were thecauses 

He had collapsed as a result of the combination of seasickness 
and medication he was taking to address seasickness.   

What lessons were learnt?   

  As a result of collapsing, this person suffered a potentially 
serious fall and injury which could have been a good deal 
worse;  

  No account was taken of the fact that he was an inexperienced trainee.  The likelihood of seasickness should 
be taken into account in risk assessment and informally, when inducting and training new personnel.  A “buddy 
system,” or similar, to ensure new personnel are looked out for, may be beneficial. 

This event is brought to you because we have received no reports of safety issues arising from seasickness – yet 
seasickness is a widely acknowledged and common issue, particularly for new seafarers or for project personnel 
spending only a short time offshore.   

4  Worker Fainted and Was Injured During Tanker Operations in A Tropical Climate 

What happened? 

A  worker  stood  up  and  subsequently  fainted.    The  incident  occurred  during  hose  handling  when  a  tanker  was 
loading at a single point mooring (SPM).  A rigger was in a crouched position working on the hoses.  On completing 
the work, he stood up, stepped away, and fainted on the tanker main deck.  He fell and in doing so he suffered a 
slight cut on the left side of the head.   

He was assisted to his feet and first aid administered.  After recovering, the injured person was requested to leave 
the tanker and the work site.  He was taken ashore and after treated at a local hospital was declared fit.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

 

It was extremely hot on board the tanker; 

  The  rigger  was  full  of  PPE  including  overalls  and  hard  hat  with  chin  strap  (he  was  not  suffering  from  sea 

  The Rigger had spent the previous night on board the tanker with inadequate supplies of drinking water and 

had to wait until morning to receive a crate of drinking water from the vessel; 

sickness); 

 

 
  The rigger did not report to the supervisor before starting work; 

 

In standing up suddenly after a long time spent crouching, the risk of fainting increased. 

What lessons were learnt? 

particularly in tropical climates; 

  Ensure personnel are medically and physically fit enough to work in the conditions for which they are hired, 

  Ensure personnel are able to remain hydrated and have sufficient drinking water particularly in hot conditions; 

  Ensure personnel eat properly and have the opportunity to take rest in the shade.  

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Diver fainted; 

  Decompression illness (DCI) incident during routine decompression of divers from saturation. 

5  Worker Suffers Hand Injury 

What happened? 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (UK HSE) reports that a company was fined after a worker suffered a serious hand 
injury  after  a  machinery  incident.    The  incident  occurred  when  his  hand  became  entangled  with  the  rotating 
workpiece of a manually operated metalwork lathe.  The resulting injury later requiring surgical amputation to part 
of his left index finger. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes 

An investigation by the UK HSE found that: 

  The machine operators were using an unsafe system of work; 

  The company failed to identify if workers were routinely using this dangerous work practice; 

  The lathe used by the injured person had a faulty emergency footbrake – and this had been reported to the 

company earlier, but the lathe had not been taken out of service. 

What lessons were learnt? 

  The company failed to identify that employees were routinely carrying out an unsafe work practice when hand 

applying emery cloth to a workpiece rotating at speed; 

  The company had failed to take the faulty lathe out of service. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Machine guarding; 

  Serious hand injury during use of deck scaler; 

  Entanglement in moving or rotating machinery – a timely reminder of the risks of entanglement in moving or 

rotating machinery from the United States Coast Guard (USCG). 

6  Worker Severely Burnt Following Oxygen Explosion 

What happened? 

The UK HSE reports that an engineering company was fined after a worker suffered life changing injuries after an 
oxygen pipe exploded in front of him.  Work was being carried out to fit a valve to a pipe that carried pure oxygen.  
The worker was carrying out checks when he heard hissing from the valve.  While investigating the noise, the pipe 
and valve erupted in flames. 

 

 
The injured person suffered severe third degree burns as a result of this incident.  He was initially not expected to 
survive, having been kept in a coma for several weeks and undergoing several skin grafts. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

An investigation by the UK HSE found the oxygen pipe had been fitted with contaminated second-hand flanges and 
butterfly valve, containing materials unsuitable for use with oxygen.  It was foreseeable that work would at some 
point be undertaken on the oxygen pipelines that ran across the entire site, yet no action had been taken to take 
control of this line or to implement training or levels of responsibility for management of such work. 

The UK HSE noted that the “incident could have been avoided if simple checks had been carried out.” 

See here for the full press release.  Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Oxygen regulator explodes causing injury. 

7 

Stored Energy – Worker Scalded When Hot Ash Dropped into Water 

What happened 

The UK HSE reports that a company was fined after a worker received severe burns to his upper body and face.  The 
incident  occurred  when  a worker  was  attempting  to  dislodge  a  blockage  in  an  energy-from-waste  furnace  at  a 
recycling plant.  

The injured person opened two hatches on a chute which took burnt waste away.  He used a metal pole to dislodge 
the blockage.  In doing so the waste dropped into a pit filled with water and a plume of hot ash and steam erupted 
from the hatches causing severe burns to his upper body and face as he turned to escape. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

The UK HSE investigation found that there was inadequate consideration or assessment of the risk to which workers 
were exposed  during  this  task.    This  meant  the  system of  work  they  had  wasn’t  sufficient  to  stop  the  incident 
happening.   

It  was  also  found  that  the  company  failed  to  implement  appropriate  systems  to  manage  and  supervise  this 
workplace activity.  This meant the limited measures they had put in place were not followed. 

The UK HSE inspector observed that it was essential that companies recognise and understand problems and put 
procedures in place to prevent them from happening, and introduce engineering controls and systems of work that 
prevent people being injured. 

See the full report on the HSE website.  Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

  Crewman badly scalded during tank cleaning; 

  Scalding injury to crew member. 

 

