AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/09 

Safety Flash 

July 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Compact Fluorescent Lights Interfering with Communications Equipment 

Members’ attention is drawn to the attached announcement from the United States  Coast Guard regarding possible radio 
frequency interference with vessel communications equipment which may arise from the use of compact fluorescent lights. 

2  High Potential Near-Miss During Back Loading 

A member has reported a high potential near miss incident which occurred during the back loading of a crane boom section 
from an offshore installation.  Although no injuries were sustained as a result of this incident, two members of the deck crew 
working on the main deck at this time could potentially have been fatally injured. 

A  platform  supply  vessel  (PSV)  was  alongside  an  offshore  installation  back  loading  a  section  of  a  crane  boom.    The  crane 
boom section was first landed on deck with no clearance from adjacent tote tanks.  However, it was necessary for deck crew 
to pass between these tote tanks and the crane boom section to access the crane hook for unlatching.  Therefore, the crane 
operator was asked to move the back loaded crane boom section towards the port side of the main deck to create a safe 
gap to allow the crew members clear access. 

The  crane  operator  moved  the  back  loaded  crane  boom  section  1-2m  to  port  and  asked  the  bridge  whether  the  new 
position was satisfactory.  The bridge then confirmed with the deck crew that this new position was acceptable for them and 
advised the crane operator accordingly.  The crane wire was then slackened and the crew members started to pass between 
the back loaded crane boom section and the nearby tote tanks to unlatch the crane hook. 

Crane boom section 

Crane boom section and tote tanks 

 

 

The  crane  operator  then  started  to  heave  and  raised  the  back  loaded  crane  boom  section  by  about  1m  to  approximately 
waist height whilst personnel were between the crane boom section and the tote tanks.  There was very high potential for 
the two crew members to be crushed between the crane boom section and the tote tanks.  A warning was given on UHF 
radio to the crew members, who were already aware of the hazardous situation and were already moving to a safe position.  
The crane operator then lowered the crane boom section to deck.   Weather conditions at the time of the incident were 
within acceptable working limits, consisting of wind speed 19 knots and significant wave height of between 1.5 and 2.0m. 

  The  crane  operator  lifted  the  back  loaded  crane  boom  section  off  the  deck  but  failed  to  effectively  communicate  his 

Further investigation revealed the following: 

intention to the vessel personnel; 

  The crane operator assumed that the deck was clear of personnel. 

The following recommendations were made: 

  Crane operators should: 

– 

– 

– 

communicate  their  intentions  to  all  relevant  installation  and  vessel  personnel  before  proceeding  with  any  lifting 
operation 
ensure  that  all  communications  are  fully  understood  and  verified  by  all  relevant  installation  and  vessel  personnel 
before proceeding with any lifting operation 
avoid making assumptions and verify that the deck area is clear of all personnel before proceeding with  any lifting 
operation 

Members are also referred to the following IMCA publications: 

IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations 

 

 

IMCA SEL 020 – Guidance on operational communications:  Part 2 – Lifting operations. 

3  Lifeboat Davit Failure 

Following a refit, sea trials were being conducted on a member’s vessel in preparation for a return to operations.  Defects 
were discovered on the davit tilt arms on both the forward and aft legs of two lifeboat davits.  Both tilt plates on each leg of 
the aft davits were found to be cracked and distorted.  It was evident after inspection that the initial defects were historical 
and may have existed for some time unnoticed.  The defects may have been compounded by load tests conducted during the 
recent refit, during which the davits had been upgraded to allow new lifeboats to be installed. 

Following further investigation with the close co-operation of the original equipment manufacturer it was concluded that the 
defects  to  the  davit  tilt  arms  were  caused  by  the  incorrect  operation  of  the  davits.    The  davit  arms  had  previously  been 
brought inboard of the vessel without the required minimum 500kg weights attached to the davit hooks.  A clear warning 
that this should not take place is included in this specific manufacturer’s documentation. 

The following actions were recommended: 

  The  original  equipment  manufacturer’s  documentation  for  the  davits  should  be  consulted  and  appropriate  operating 
instructions  verified  to  ensure  existing  practices  do  not  deviate  from  manufacturer-recommended  launching  practices, 
nor compromise the safety and operational integrity of the equipment; 

  Davit launch/recovery operators should ensure that the davit is operated in accordance with the guidance provided by 

the original equipment manufacturer; 

  Warning notices should be posted adjacent to each lifeboat operating station (see the diagram below); 

  A thorough inspection of tilt plates should be included in monthly planned maintenance checks; 

  Since the defects appear to have originated some time in the past, better quality control is required of bi-annual, annual 
and five-yearly inspections by specialist contractors to ensure that they are conducting the thorough examination of the 
equipment properly and to an appropriately high standard. 

 

 

 

 

Worn davit tilt plate and parts 

Worn davit tilt plate and parts 

Lifeboat davit 

 

  

  

Suggested warning placard to be placed near 

lifeboat operating station 

  

4  Uncontrolled Movement of A-Frame 

A member has reported an incident in which there was an uncontrolled movement 
of  an  A-frame  mechanism.    The  uncontrolled  movement  of  the  A-frame  luffing 
function occurred whilst personnel were working on top of the tether management 
system  (TMS).    The  incident  occurred  during  the  re-attachment  of  a  main  lift 
umbilical  bullet,  following  a  mechanical  re-termination.    Winch  and  A-frame 
functions had been used to manoeuvre the end of the umbilical through the top of 
the TMS until the bullet reached the lift point swivel.   A technician was on top of 
the  TMS  to  guide  the  umbilical  and  then  install  the  clevis  pins  and  keeper  plates.  
The technician was in full personal protective equipment (PPE) and also using a fall 
arrester fixed to the top of the A-frame. 

It was at this point that the A-frame started to luff out.  Because the winch did not 
pay out at the same time the umbilical came under tension and caused the TMS to 
lift  approximately  1m  off  the  deck.    The  technician  standing  by  at  the  control 
console  immediately  hit  the emergency  stop,  turning  off  the  hydraulics  to  prevent 
any  further  movement.    As  soon  as  the  TMS  began  to  lift  the  technician  on  top 
managed  to  step  off  to  safety  on  to  the  top  of  the  winch  frame.    There  were  no 
injuries or damage to equipment. 

Subsequent investigation by  the company revealed that  a  proportional valve  driver,  a part of the hydraulic control system, 
had  failed  and  was  giving  a  constant  output  signal  to  the  luffing  valve  without  any  input  command.    This  caused  the  luffing 
valve to operate in an uncontrolled way, which in turn caused the A-frame to move.  The valve driver was replaced and full 
normal operation was restored. 

TMS and A-frame 

 

 

The following points were noted: 

equipment; 

  The  events  could  have  resulted  in  a  high  potential  incident,  involving  serious  injury  or  damage  both  to  personnel  and 

  The task should have had a specific risk assessment in place identifying the hazards associated with each job step; 

  The availability of power to the A-frame at the point of attachment should have been identified; 

  When  the  clevis  pins  were  to  be  inserted,  the  hydraulics  to  the  system  should  have  been  isolated  thus  avoiding  any 

inadvertent operation. 

The following actions were recommended: 

  Operating procedures and risk assessments were changed so as to isolate the hydraulics whilst personnel are on top of 

the TMS with the bullet and lift point swivel mechanically connected; 

  Modifications  were  made  to  the  hydraulic  control  system  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  this  incident.    The  modification 
included  the  installation  of  a  relay  isolating  the  proportional  valve  driver  output until  the  relative  joystick  is  operated.  
This would prevent uncontrolled operation of the luffing rams if the proportional valve driver unit had a similar failure 
again. 

 
 
 
 
June 8, 2009                                                                                                                      Alert 02-09 
Washington, DC 

Compact Fluorescent Lights 

This  Safety  Alert  serves  to  inform  the  maritime  industry  that  energy  saving  Compact  Fluorescent 
Lights (CFL) or lighting, sometimes known as radio frequency (RF) lighting devices may interfere with 
certain communications equipment. CFLs employ a RF lighting device to excite a gas inside a bulb in 
order to produce light.  
 
The  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  recognized  the  need  for  and  adopted  rules  to 
control  the  harmful  interference  to  radio  communications  services  from  these  devices.  During  the 
rulemaking  process  the  Coast  Guard  provided  comments  and  recommended  an  advisory  label  for 
CFLs / RF lighting devices warning users about potential interference to communication services and 
particularly with respect to devices capable of producing emissions in the 0.45-30 MHz band.  As a 
result,  the  FCC  required  manufacturers  of  CFLs  to  provide  an  advisory  statement,  either  on  the 
product packaging or with other user documentation, similar to the following: "This product may cause 
interference 
installed  near  maritime  safety 
communications  equipment  or  other  critical  navigation  or  communication  equipment  operating 
between 0.45-30 MHz."  
 
The Coast Guard has learned that CFLs have been installed on the navigation bridges of vessels and 
in  other  places  capable  of  causing  radio  communications  interference.    Marine  inspectors,  vessel 
owners  and  operators  should  be  aware  of  this  potential  safety  hazard  and  take  proper  action  as 
needed. 
 
Below are examples of some compact fluorescent lights with different shapes and sizes.   
 

to  radio  communications  and  should  not  be 

 

 

   
 
 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Office of Domestic Vessel 
Activities (CG-5431), United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.   
 
                                                                        ******* 
 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

