Safety Flash 

August 2017 

 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 19/17 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them. The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents. 
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant. All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members. Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here. Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any  actions,  lessons  learnt,  recommendations  and  suggestions  in  IMCA  safety  flashes  are  generated  by  the  submitting  organisation.  IMCA  safety  flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

Focus: Hand and Finger Injuries 

All the incidents here involve workers sustaining actual injuries to the fingers or hands. 

1 

LTI: Injury to Right Wrist 

What happened 

Someone  using  a  power  tool  suffered  a  serious 
injury  to  the  right  wrist  when  the  drill  got  out  of 
control. Vessel engineers were installing a support 
frame  for  spray  protection  curtains  around  the 
evaporator  in  the  engine  room.  The  task  required 
the engineers, whilst working at height, to drill three 
10 mm holes in the frame and add the splash curtain 
to the support frame. 

To  access  the  support  frame,  a  step  ladder  with  a 
designated working platform was used. The injured person was working on the platform with a power drill. He was 
directing the drill with his right hand with his left hand on the supporting handle on the left-hand side of the drill. 
It is estimated that during the drilling of these holes, the drill was at an angle of approximately 45˚. During the 
drilling of a 10 mm hole, the drill bit snagged within the metal tubing of the supporting frame, causing the pistol 
drill to kick back and spin in a clockwise direction. As the drill spun, the pistol grip was pulled from the engineer’s 
right hand. The pistol drill continued to rotate, then contacted his right wrist/forearm, causing a lost time injury 
(LTI). 

What went wrong/causes 

  There was a lack of active supervision. Supervisors should have a full understanding of safe systems of work, 
and  thus  be  able  to  ensure  that  if  the  circumstances  of  an  operation  change,  the  team  is  able  to  respond 
correctly and recognise any new requirements in each situation; 

  A causal factor was the fact that the task was being carried out at height, which made it difficult to drill the hole 
in the correct position. To attain this position the employee had to work in a position which caused the drill to 
snag;  

  There was poor procedural and risk awareness surrounding the activity: 

  Whilst  a  toolbox  talk was  conducted  between  the  engineers  carrying  out  the  task,  and  this  highlighted 
potential hand injuries and slip/trip hazards, no consideration was given to the increased height of the task 
or the use of power tools whist working from a ladder/platform 

 

  No permit to work (PTW) or job risk assessment (JRA) was considered necessary, as a similar task had been 
conducted previously. The engineers did not identify the difference in height between the previous task 
(180 cm) and the task in hand (293 cm); 

  The work was incorrectly planned and did not have to be done at height. Personnel failed to recognise they 
were working at height. Had the task been correctly planned and classified as work at height, the decision could 
have been made to pre-drill the holes at deck level, thus allowing the work party to attain the correct working 
position and potentially mitigating the snagging of the drill. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  Correct tools and equipment used in the wrong conditions can still result in an incident; 

  Routine tasks can become hazardous when changes are not correctly managed; 

  The step ladder with designated working platform should have had the handrails and securing chain in position 

(they were previously removed due to space required to store the ladders); 

  Tasks requiring ladders, working platforms or alternate access solutions should be reviewed to determine if the 
appropriate level of work control is applied. Risk assessments and routine duties should be updated accordingly. 

2 

LTI: Crush Injury to Middle and Index Finger 

What happened 

Riggers on a vessel were moving heavy deck plates (2.45 m x 1.2 m x 5 mm, weighing 114 kg) when one of them got 
his hand caught, causing a crush injury. The riggers were tasked with cleaning an area on the vessel. To do this, they 
had to lift the deck plates, degrease the deck below and power wash from the suspended deck above. During the 
task, it was noted that the debris and corrosion on the deck below would require shot blasting. A management 
decision was made to remove all the deck plates and stack them against handrails in preparation for this work. 

While  moving  one  of  the  plates  and  turning  it  through  90˚  onto  its  long  axis,  to  be  slid  over  the  angle  beam 
foundation, the leading corner of the plate caught on a section of angle beam and stopped sliding. A rigger (the IP 
in the sketch below) attempted to rectify this by lifting the corner, enabling the rest of the team to push the deck 
plate. Upon setting down the deck plate, his middle and index finger became trapped between the angle beam 
foundation and the deck plate, causing a serious injury. 

What went wrong/causes 

  The incident occurred as a result of ‘scope creep’. There was no proper Management of Change; 

 

 
  The size and weight of the deck plates did not allow for a safe and ergonomically friendly means of moving 

them, especially over the angle beam foundation; 

  The  injured  person  placed  his  hand  beneath  the  deck  plate  despite  being  instructed  not  to  do  so  by  his 

  The injured person was wearing welding gloves,  rather than the  impact  gloves required in the JRA (job risk 

supervisor; 

analysis); 

  Pinch points had been discussed in a task-specific toolbox talk held just before starting the job. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  The change of job scope (‘scope creep’) should have triggered a stop, leading to the change being properly 

managed. A new permit should have been raised with a task specific JRA; 

  Members may wish to use this example to highlight the issue of ‘scope creep’ and appropriate Management of 

Change – particularly where manual handling is involved. 

See IMCA SEL 001 – Guidelines for Management of Change. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incident in which a person suffered a serious finger injury, in 
which one causal factor was failure to manage change: 

 

Line of Fire LTI: Finger Injury During Lifting Operations 

3  Hand Injury Whilst Using Pillar Drill 

What happened 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  (MSF)  has  published  an  alert  in  which 
someone  was  injured  whilst  using  a  pillar  drill.  An  experienced 
engineer was changing out a drill bit on a tower drill in the engine room 
workshop. While doing so he inadvertently operated the wrong handle 
and started the drill. The engineer was wearing gloves to carry out this 
task and as the drill turned the glove caught and turned with the drill 
bit, trapping his hand inside and causing a hand injury. 

He was sent ashore for treatment. 

What went wrong/causes 

The  subsequent  investigation  highlighted  several  safety  critical 
points, a selection of which are noted below: 

  The  drill  had  multi-function  controls  (including  clutch  speed, 
gears, slow and fast operation, on/off switches) none of which 
were actually marked to indicate their purpose; 

  By  its  design,  the  emergency  stop  button  for  the  drill  did  not 
clearly  identify  to  the  operator  when  it  was  engaged  or 
deactivated; 

  There was no ‘green light’ (or similar indicator) to show when the 

equipment was ‘energised’. 

Any  modification  of  equipment  should  only  be  done  after 
consultation  and  agreement  with  the  manufacturer  to  ensure  the 

 
modification does not adversely interfere or affect any of the other functions of the drill. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  The company reporting the incident introduced ‘drill familiarisation’ to the engineers’ induction; 

  A full and comprehensive risk assessment should be carried out for the use of all engine room equipment; 

  Engineers intending to use the equipment should be fully familiar with those risk assessments and comply with 

their requirements; 

 

IMCA  notes  that  in  many  countries  there  are  regulatory  requirements  (the  Provision  and  Use  of  Work 
Equipment Regulations (PUWER) in the UK) which should have been applied with regard to equipment control 
markings. 

Note: A more recent model of the same drill incorporates a safety feature where the drill cannot be operated if the 
drill  guard  is  in  the  open  position.  Such  safety  features  should  be  function-checked  to  ensure  they  are  fully 
operational before carrying out any drill changes. 

Members may wish to review the following incident: 

  Near Miss: Drawstring on Storm Jacket Nearly Drawn Into Rotating Equipment 

4 

Two Cases of Hand Injuries – UK HSE 

Incident 1: Worker Injures Hand on Lathe 

What happened 

THE UK HSE reports that an engineering firm was sentenced after a worker suffered injuries to his hand. A worker 
was polishing a metal shaft on a lathe using emery cloth, while wearing gloves. The glove appeared to snag and 
dragged his hand towards the rotating shaft. As a result of the incident he had stitches in his hand and dislocated 
his scaphoid bone – part of his wrist. 

The injured person had only been working for four days at the site. 

What went wrong/causes 

The HSE investigation found that: 

polishing; 

  No suitable and sufficient assessments had been carried out to determine control measures for this task of 

  There were no clear guidelines for employees and others, such as agency workers, on safe ways to polish. 

The HSE inspector commented: “Those in control of work have a responsibility to devise safe methods of working 
and to provide the necessary information, instruction and training to their workers in the safe system of working. 
This incident could so easily have been avoided by simply carrying out correct control measures and safe working 
practices.” 

Incident 2: Workers exposed to Hand-Arm Vibration Syndrome (HAVS) 

What happened 

THE UK Health & Safety Executive (HSE) reports that an engineering firm has been fined for failing to control the 
risk of hand-arm vibration syndrome (HAVS) to employees using hand-held power tools.  A welder who had been 
working at the company for a number of years had been given a job that involved a significant amount of grinding 

 
and polishing. After some hours on the task, the worker began to experience numbness and tingling. He asked to 
swap with another worker but was told to carry on. 

Whilst his symptoms continued he was told by his supervisor to carry on using vibrating tools. A few weeks later, a 
20-year-old apprentice welder also began to suffer from vibration-related symptoms from using similar tools. 

What went wrong/causes 

The company failed to adequately control the risks to its employees from exposure to vibration. The company also 
failed to ensure its employees were given sufficient information, instruction and training on the effects of working 
with vibrating hand tools. 

The HSE inspector said: “This is a case of the company failing to protect workers using vibrating tools. Exposure to 
hand-arm vibration is a well-known risk which the company failed to adequately control. The company also failed 
to  ensure  workers  were  looked  after  when  symptoms  did  arise  leading  to  further  exposure.  This  was  wholly 
inadequate, and led to two employees suffering significant health effects.” 

Members are encouraged to bring to the attention of their crews the IMCA safety promotional materials on hand 
safety and other topics, available free to members. See https://www.imca-int.com/core/hsse/publications/safety-
promotion/  

Hand and finger injuries comprise a significant proportion of all the incidents reported by IMCA members and, in 
many cases, the root causes of the injuries – as in these cases – are failure to assess risk or properly manage change, 
or failure to provide a safe system of work. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incident: 

  Uncontrolled Exposure to Hand-Arm Vibration (HAVS) 

In summary 

IMCA members continue to report significant numbers of hand and finger injuries.  They can be broadly divided 
into two categories. Firstly, incidents/injuries in which the use of hand tools was a causal factor, and secondly, 
finger nips and crush injuries caused when moving large or heavy objects from one place to another (which is a core 
task for anyone operating vessels and hence for most IMCA members.) 

Members may wish to look at some of the following incidents (search words: hand, finger, crush): 

This list focuses on injuries caused during use of hand 
tools. 

This list focuses on finger nips and crushes generally, but 
not always, from loading or lifting operations.  

  Machine Guarding 

  Crushed Finger 

 

Lost  Time  Injury  (LTI):  Hand  Cut  During  Cutting 
Operations 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Finger Injury Whilst Working 
in Engine Room 

  Marine Safe Australia – Hand Injuries 

  Finger Injury During Maintenance Work – Restricted 

  Hand Injuries (MSF) 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Hand Injury 

  Portable Grinders – Hand Safety 

  Finger and Hand Injuries 

  Finger/Hand Injuries (IADC) 

 

 

Work Case 

  Finger Injury During Loading Operations 

 

 

Line  of  Fire  LTI:  Finger 
Operations 

Injury  During  Lifting 

Lack of Safety Awareness: Crush Injury During Lifting 
Operations 

  Serious Hand Injury  

