AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 14/11 

Safety Flash 

  December 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss – Diver Loss of Gas 

A member has reported a near miss incident in which a diver very nearly lost his gas supply. The incident occurred when a 
vessel was engaged in flushing operations, and was assisting with barrier testing flushing/flooding and positive isolation. The 
bellman reported that the diving bell was snatching heavily and the decision was made to abort the dive. Both divers returned 
to under the bell. Diver 1 was recovered into the bell while diver 2 waited on the seabed. Diver 1 entered the bell just as the 
vessel heaved; both diver 1 and the bellman were unbalanced. 

At  this  point  diver  2  reported  to  the  dive  supervisor  that  his  ‘gas  had  gone  tight’  and  opened  his bailout  supply.  The  dive 
supervisor immediately informed the bellman who saw that the gas supply valve was half closed. The bellman opened the gas 
supply valve fully and main gas supply was restored to diver 2. Diver 2 secured his bailout supply, then left the seabed and 
was safely recovered into the bell. There were no injuries or ill effects. 

Dive bell panel with valves in original closed position 

(Note: valves turn anti-clockwise to open) 

 

 

After the divers returned to the chambers the bell was vented to surface to allow for checks and any modifications to be 
carried out on the valve in question, to prevent recurrence.  

The valve control handle was reconfigured and turned 180 degrees from its original closed position, which will ensure that 
when the valve is in the open position, that it cannot be accidently knocked to closed. 

 

Dive bell panel showing modifications to the valve handles 

 

An investigation revealed the following:  

  The main cause of the incident was that when the bellman lost his footing as the bell heaved during marginal weather 
conditions,  he  fell  against  the  diver’s  gas  supply  valve  and  knocked  it  toward  the  closed  position.  The  design  and 
positioning of this valve arrangement, in the context of the confined space within the bell, was a potential hazard that had 
been overlooked. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

  Diving operations were suspended until corrective actions taken, and the black box hard disk recording was copied; 

  The bell was surfaced for investigation and repositioning of the valve/valve handle to prevent a recurrence; 

  The dive team were fully briefed on the incident and actions taken to prevent recurrence. 

The following lessons were learnt: 

  Diving bells  are confined spaces packed with complex equipment. The ergonomics of  bell diving operations brings  the 
risk of  equipment  being inadvertently  moved or operated.  Changing the way key components function can reduce the 
risk of inadvertent operation; 

  The actions of the supervisor, bellman and diver were correctly and quickly undertaken as soon as the gas went ‘tight’, 

showing the benefit of undertaking regular diving emergency drills. 

2 

Identification of Differential Pressures Subsea during Diving Operations  

A member has reported an incident in which, during diver intervention work on a subsea pipeline, considerable suction was 
encountered  when  the  diver  attempted  to  separate  a  pair  of  flanges.  The  diver  noted  the  suction  before  the  flange  was 
completely separated and called a stop to operations before any injury occurred or damage resulted. 

An investigation revealed that there was  confusion and lack of understanding regarding the difference between the internal 
pipeline pressure and the subsea ambient pressure caused by the water depth. 

Although negative pressure (suction) is something that divers are especially concerned about and aware of, it is not always a 
generally understood hazard that is readily comprehended or identified by persons not normally involved in diving operations 
i.e. the concept of standing in and working in  a space where the  ambient pressure  is greater than that contained in a void 
which is being opened, for example, when a diver opens a bolted flange on a pipeline. 

The following example was given: 

 

If  a  pipeline  from  a  platform  extends  to  the  seabed  at  150msw,  the  absolute  pressures  and  differential  pressure  effects  are 
considerably different for a surface worker on an installation and the diver on the seabed. If the installation pressurises a pipeline 
to 10 Bar gauge (11 Bar absolute), this shows itself as a net positive pressure of 10 Bar to the person on the installation and a net 
negative pressure of 5 Bar to the diver at 150msw (16 Bar absolute). 

 
Because  of  the  opportunity  for  confusion  and  the  potential  for  two  completely  different  hazards  (retained  pressure  and 
suction) it is important that any pressures noted in project procedures, permits, risk assessments, dive plans etc. are done so 
in a clear, concise and objective way ensuring that there is no room for misinterpretation or misunderstanding.  

When recording or stating pressures in documents where there is scope for misinterpretation due to differential pressures 
during diver intervention works, all pressures should be noted as the actual pressure value, such as Pressurise pipeline to 12 
bar gauge rather than (as is often the case) relative or referenced pressure values such as Pressurise pipeline to 2 bar greater 
than  seabed  ambient.  If  not  completely  unambiguous,  instructions  should  also  state  where  the  pressure  is  measured  e.g. 
whether on the installation, or subsea. 

Further information is available in the following IMCA guidance: 

IMCA D 014 – IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving   

IMCA D 044 – Guidelines for isolation and intervention: Diver access to subsea systems 

 

 

3  Crewman Injured when Steel Plates fell against Him   

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman was injured by steel plates falling whilst being placed in storage. The 
incident happened on a vessel when four crew members were moving steel plates (each weighing 250 kg) from the bosun’s 
store to the welding shop. Their intent was to create a new storage area in the welding shop for these steel plates. The new 
storage area was to be at a slight elevation of approximately 75 cm off the deck. 

The plates were moved by overhead hoisting equipment from the bosun’s store to the welding shop. Because there were 
some brackets welded on the bulkhead, the steel plates had to be pushed into place manually once they were  lifted onto the 
elevated  storage  area.  Because  several  plates  were  to  be  stored  in  the  storage  area  they  were  temporarily  secured  with 
clamps. When all plates were in their final position, steel poles were welded on the deck to secure them in place. 

During the job a securing clamp was inadvertently knocked off while crewmembers manually moved one of the plates into its 
final position. As  a result the plates fell over towards one of the crew members.  He saw them coming, but owing to the 
weight of the plates he was unable to push them back and instead tried to jump out of the way. He was not successful; the 
plates came into contact with his body and he hit his head on a nearby column, resulting in small fractures to the skull and 
shoulder.   

Showing welding bay storage area  

 

 

Showing securing clamp 

 

 

 

An investigation revealed the following: 

  The  job  was  considered  routine  and  no  Job  Hazard  Analysis  was  conducted.  Though  the  handling  of  steel  plates  is  a 

routine activity on board this vessel, the creation of a new storage area was not routine; 

  Manual handling of steel plates weighing 250kg is inherently risky; 

  A  workplace  inspection  prior  to  the  activity  would  have  revealed  the  risks  posed  by  the  obstructing  brackets  on  the 

bulkhead; 

  The clamps used to secure the steel plates temporarily were not adequate or safe for the activity being conducted; 

  There were too many people in too small a work space.  

 

4  Lifeboat Falls after Equipment Failure 

A member has reported an incident in which equipment failure allowed a  lifeboat to fall free from one side of a vessel. The 
incident  occurred  during  periodical  function  tests  performed  on  the  vessel  lifeboats.  When  the  port  side  lifeboat  was 
recovered, one of the wire rerouting sheaves from the launching/recovery system buckled and broke off allowing the lifeboat 
to  free  fall  from  one  side.  The  lifeboat  and  launching  system  were  seriously  damaged.  No  personnel  were  on  board  the 
lifeboat at the time, and there were no injuries. 

 

  

 

 

A thorough investigation was conducted and the following was noted: 

  When the incident occurred, one davit arm was in its rest position, while the other one was still under recovery; 

  Severe deformation of the sheaves and their support plate indicated an ‘out of plane’ loading; 

  The sheave had signs of groove wear and corrosion of the bottom side; 

  Though  the  functioning  of  the  entire  lifeboat  launch  and  recovery  system  was  tested  periodically,  there  was  no 

preventive maintenance programme for separate pieces of equipment within the system. 

The following remedial actions were put in place: 

  Replaced lifeboat lift wire with particular attention to the length adjustment; 

  Replaced damaged (bent) support plate; 

  Thorough cleaning and removing old paint from boom guide and sheaves, replacing as necessary; 

  Non-destructive testing on pin from sheaves. 

It  was  also  noted  that  owing  to  the  work  environment  and  equipment  criticality,  a  preventative  maintenance  schedule  for 
individual parts on the lifeboat launch and recovery system should be developed, as this would reduce the likelihood of this 
type of equipment failure. 

 
5  Diver Helmet Hat Light 

A member has reported an  incident in which  an overheating diver helmet hat light nearly  caused a fire inside a diving bell 
onboard a dive support vessel.  The diving bell was not under pressure and the bottom doors were open to atmosphere. A 
report was made of a strong smell of smoke within the dive  control area. This was  investigated  and smoke was observed 
coming from the forward diving bell, situated within the bell garage. The dedicated emergency teams were mustered and the 
appropriate emergency response actions instigated. The fire in the diving bell was successfully extinguished. There were no 
injuries.  The  fire  resulted  in  extensive  damage  sustained  to  a  Kirby  Morgan  17B  helmet,  light,  camera  and  associated 
umbilicals.  

  

 

 

Damaged Kirby Morgan 17B helmet   

 

 

Location of helmet light control switch 

An investigation established that the source of the fire was a dive helmet hat light which overheated to the point that the 
outer  casing  caught  fire.  The  light  overheated  because  it  was  inadvertently  switched  on  whilst  the  equipment  was  on  the 
surface and without any type of cooling in place, such as seawater. 

The helmet light is operated via  a surface mounted push button located in dive control forward of the dive control panel. 
Some twenty-five minutes before the incident occurred, the dive crew had held a short meeting in the immediate vicinity of 
the  push  button  switch box that  controls  the  helmet  lights  in  the  forward  bell  for  both  diver  1  &  2.  It  was  surmised  that 
during this meeting an attendee inadvertently leaned against the push button switch and turned on the helmet light. Nearly 
half an hour elapsed before the first smell of smoke was reported.  

The lessons learnt were as follows: 

  There  were  no  safeguards  to  prevent  the  activation  of  the  push  button  controlling  the  helmet  hat  light.  Temporary 
protection  was  put  in  place  on  the  switch  box,  and  the  control  boxes  replaced  with  guarded  switches  to  prevent 
inadvertent activation; 

  The hat light would overheat without seawater cooling, and consequently should not be used for long periods in air. A 
new  design  for  this  model  of  light  incorporates  a  positive  temperature  coefficient  (PTC)  thermistor  device  which 
prevents the unit from overheating. 

 

6  Failure of Pallet Lifters   

A member has reported two incidents involving the failure of pallet lifters. The first incident resulted in the failure of a  wire 
rope  for  a  fork  pallet  lifter  which  parted  following  the  lifting  of  a  load  of  chemical  drums  onto  a  vessel  deck.  The  second 
incident resulted in a pallet lifter fork being twisted due to overloading during a lifting operation to load a pallet of steel plate 
onto a vessel deck. 

Incident 1 

A pallet lifter with a 2.5T safe working load (SWL) had lifted a 400kg load of 16 chemical drums onto the working deck of a 
vessel.  The  chemical  drums  being  lifted  had  also  been  cargo  strapped  to  the  lifter  as  a  means  of  secondary  securing.  The 
pallet  lifter  in  use  had  recently  undergone  a  thorough  inspection  and  had  been  correctly  colour-coded  by  a  3rd  party 
inspection company to verify its fitness for purpose. As the load was landed on the deck, a rigger removed the lifter forks 
from  the pallet.  At  this  point  the  wire  rope  (which  attaches  to  the  lifting  eye  and  the tensioning  springs  on this  particular 
model) parted and the wire struck the rigger across the back of his hand. There were no injuries as the rigger was wearing 
Kevlar gloves which provided adequate protection for this type of operation. The rigger notified the vessel supervision and 
the pallet lifter was taken out of use immediately. 

 

 

Pallet lifter after parting of wire rope 

After investigation, the following was: 

  On further inspection, the general condition of the pallet lifter, and the wire rope in particular were found to be in poor 

condition and showing signs of corrosion and poor maintenance. This should have been noticed; 

  The 3rd party inspection company which had completed a thorough inspection of the lifter to allow its updated colour-
code  and continued use had  clearly not provided  a sufficient standard of inspection to  ensure this piece of equipment 
was safe for work on this vessel; 

  All  lifting  equipment  should  be  given  a  full  visual  inspection  by  the  user  prior to  any  lifts,  with  all  defects  or  concerns 

being raised immediately. The condition of this lifter should have been noticed and highlighted by the onboard team;  

  There was no on-going maintenance on this kind of equipment and they are used until failure; 

  Had the pallet lifter been entered into the vessel planned maintenance system this would allow for regular inspections to 

take place, with paint and greasing regimes to be implemented as necessary;  

  When  purchasing  lifting  equipment  for  vessel  use,  full  consideration  should  be  given  by  a  competent  person  as  to 

whether or not the item is suitable for the operations and environment in which it will be used onboard. 

 

Incident 2 

A pallet lifter with a 2.0T SWL was being used to transfer pallets of steel plate on to the main working deck of a vessel. The 
plate being loaded was delivered on pallets and wrapped with plastic covers. The weight of the load had not been provided 
by the supplier and was not known to the lifting team prior to the lift.  

This lifting operation involved inserting the pallet lifter forks, and the load being raised slightly to allow  a secondary cargo 
strap  to  be  positioned  around  the  load  and  prevent  any  movement  during  the  lift.  However,  as  the  load  was  raised 
approximately six inches off the quayside to attach the cargo straps, the plates moved, sliding forward and to the left of the 
forks. The pallet lifter and load was then returned to the quay and the forks removed from the pallet. Once the pallet lifter 
had been removed from the pallet it was evident that the left fork had been twisted due to the load moving and overloading 
the pallet lifter fork. 

Pallet of steel plate for loading 

 

After investigation, the following was noted: 

  A  permit  to  work  and  lift  plan  had  been  completed  for  this  operation  but  no  consideration  was  given  to  the  lack  of 
information about the load to be moved or the limitations of the pallet lifter. This should have been highlighted in the lift 
plan risk assessment and the toolbox talk prior to moving the pallets. Hazard awareness and correct lifting procedures 
were not applied during this lifting operation; 

  As the steel plate loads had no clear indication of the weights contained on each pallet, a lifter which has a SWL of 2.0T 

should not have been used without confirmation that the working limits would not be exceeded by the load; 

  Good practice for transporting of plate onto vessels should be to transfer the load into a certified lifting basket ensuring 

the lifting of all plates in a contained and controlled manner. 

7 

  Near Miss during Anchor Line Recovery 

The Marine Safety Forum (MSF) has published the following Safety Flash 11-38 regarding a near miss incident during anchor 
line  recovery.  A  large  anchor  chain  snapped  and  the  inboard  end  came  back  onto  the  deck  out  of  control,  almost  hitting 
some of the crew.  

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.38.pdf   

8  Poor Condition of Lifting Strops 

The  MSF  has  published  the  following  Safety  Flash  11-39  regarding  lifting  strops  found  in  poor  condition.    Recent 
audits/inspections have highlighted deficiencies with regards the state of lifting strops which were found to be in a severely 
deteriorated condition, unfit for purpose and still in service onboard. 

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.39.pdf    

Members are also referred to IMCA SEL 019  Guidelines for lifting operations 

 
9  Leak of Oil-based Mud from Drain Valve 

The MSF has published the following Safety Flash 11-40 regarding leakage of oil-based mud from a drain valve. This incident 
had the potential to cause a significant pollution incident and highlights the need for pre-loading checklists to be carried out 
thoroughly. 

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-11.40.pdf  

10  Biocide Incident   

The MSF has published the following Safety Flash 11-41 regarding a biocide pollution incident. During the treatment of ships 
fuel  tanks  with  a  biocide  chemical  an  incident  in  which  someone  was  sprayed  around  the  face  and  upper  body  with  the 
biocide  chemical.  This  resulted  in  eye  abrasion  and  skin  irritation  and  led  to  the  injured  person  being  evacuated  from  the 
vessel for further medical examination and treatment. 

Further information can be found from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//notices/msf-safety-flash-11.41.pdf  

 

