AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/14 

Safety Flash 

  July 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Bell Re-claim Failure Resulting in Minor Injury 

A member has reported an incident in which a member of a dive team suffered minor injuries when equipment in a diving bell 
failed  under  pressure.    The  incident  occurred  during  saturation  diving  operations  at  110  msw.    The  bellman  was  assisting 
diver 1 and diver 2 to prepare for diving activities.  On opening the reclaim return line hull valve the internal in line water 
trap  was  immediately  pressurised  and  ruptured.    Perspex  fragments  of  the  water  trap  dispersed  inside  the  bell  causing 
superficial  lacerations  to  the  bellman’s  left  ear  and  face.    The  force  of  the  blast  caused  a  small  rupture  to  the  tympanic 
membrane in his left ear. Diving activities were aborted and divers were returned to the living chamber.  The injured person 
was further assessed/treated by the diving medical technician in consultation with a physician ashore and with assistance of 
the on board medic. 

 

 

Showing reclaim before and after failure 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦ 

In 2013 the diving bell underwent refurbishment and total re-build and as part of this process the external check valve 
was removed and then re-installed;  

♦  The diving bell had made 23 successful bell runs since being refurbished;  

♦  The  reclaim  compressor  solenoid  had  failed  resulting  in  non-operation  of  the  cross  feed  actuator,  in  turn  causing 

pressure to be retained in the exhaust line;  

♦  The bell return line external check valve had been previously incorrectly installed (inverted) during the refurbishment, 
allowing stored gas in the exhaust line to pressurise the internal in line water trap once the reclaim return line hull valve 
was opened by the bellman. 

The root cause of the incident was determined to be that the check valve was incorrectly installed (inverted).  A contributing 
factor was that the planned maintenance regime did not include increased frequency of filter change since the refurbishment; 
the reclaim compressor was started remotely. 

Our member drew the following lesson:  

 
♦  During refurbishment and  before being certified for use, the saturation system was subject to  a number of  audits  and 
inspections conducted by third party specialist, client, owner, and project personnel.  Each time, the inverted check valve 
had  not  been  spotted.    The  audits/inspections  were  consistent  with  IMCA  and  industry  requirements,  but  did  not 
consider the system at the individual component level required to identify the incorrectly fitted check valve. 

Members  may  wish  to  look  at  the  following  incidents  involving  pressure  failure  in  saturation  diving  equipment  (keywords: 
pressure, saturation): 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 08/06 – Incident: 1 Trapped pressure release incident 

IMCA SF 07/14 – Incident: 1 Thermos cup exploded after being in hyperbaric environment 

2  Near Miss: Unauthorised Release of Shore Controlled Mooring Lines   

A member has reported a near miss incident in which mooring lines were released from shore without permission from the 
vessel bridge.  The incident occurred when the vessel started singling up her mooring lines for departure from a shipyard. 
The vessel was loaded with a module, which restricted the view aft from the bridge.  The vessel was moored “Mediterranean 
style”, including her stern, with two bow anchors, six wire ropes and two conventional mooring lines. Four of the six wire 
ropes were under shore control. 

When the crew of the vessel (with pilot on board) started to single up her mooring lines, the four wire ropes under shore 
control at the aft side of the vessel were simultaneously released by shore side personnel.  This was done without permission 
from the bridge, when the tugs were not yet in position.  This release of the mooring lines could not be observed from the 
bridge.  The bridge was notified with some delay by an additional lookout aft of the vessel.  By swiftly ordering propulsion 
astern,  the  vessel  master  avoided  heavy  stress  and  possible  breakage  of  the  two  remaining  mooring  lines.    The  vessel 
remained under control and a tug was made fast before releasing the remaining two mooring lines.  

There were no injuries, damage to assets or uncontrolled vessel movements, owing to the swift and effective action from the 
vessel master. 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦ 

 A pre-departure meeting with all involved parties was carried out two days prior departure.  Due to adverse weather, it 
was clearly stated at that meeting that the vessel would single up line by line; 

♦  Proper  precautions  were  taken,  such  as  hazard  identification  (HAZID),  toolbox  meetings  and  Job  Safety  Analyses, 

mooring/unmooring plans; 

♦  Actual departure was delayed by last minute modification works on the cargo; 

♦  The vessel master repeatedly refused to start to single up as the gangway was still in place due to delayed works on the 

cargo; 

♦  The release of the shore side mooring lines was not stopped by the vessel’s superintendent; 

♦  The vessel’s superintendent was not equipped with a radio.  It was agreed to communicate by mobile phone.  

Following the incident, our member drew the following conclusions and recommendations: 

♦  The last minute modification works on the module and the resulting delay of departure were improperly and ineffectively 
communicated  to  and  between  parties  involved.    The  delay  resulted  in  a  change,  for  which  Management  Of  Change 
procedures should have been followed in order to effectively prevent the incident as occurred; 

♦  Reliance on mobile cell phones for operations is inadequate.  All responsible parties should communicate by radio with 

an agreed protocol; 

♦  Effective and immediate communication between the vessel master  and the vessel superintendent is a vital and critical 

safety factor during such operations and should be catered for accordingly in project execution plans; 

♦  The shore-based linesmen provided by the shipyard clearly demonstrated a lack of awareness of the risks involved.  To 
lower these risks, when employing third-party personnel for critical operations, the qualifications and training of those 
personnel involved should be prominently addressed and audited beforehand in project HSE plans.  

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: mooring, lines);  

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 04/09 – Incident: 3 (from the UK P&I Club) Mooring incident; 

IMCA SF 04/10 – Incident: 1 Person Injured by Mooring Lines; 

IMCA SF 07/10 – Incident: 2 Crewman Fatally Injured During Mooring Operations. 

 
3  Failure of Lifeboat Release Hook Mechanism  

A  member  has  reported  a  recent  high  potential  incident  involving  the  failure  of  a  lifeboat  release  hook  mechanism.    The 
incident  took  place  during  the  quarterly  mandatory  lifeboat  lowering  operations.  The  forward  release  hook  mechanism 
opened resulting in the lifeboat dropping into a vertical position, but remaining suspended from the aft hook.  Four persons 
where onboard the lifeboat at the time, but were uninjured. 

The release hook system in place onboard the vessel 
is  of  the  Schat-Harding  H-80,  ‘on-load’  release  type. 
The  basic  overview  of  the  system  is  shown  in  the 
figure on the left, with the components noted below. 
 

Item 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

Component 
Davit Fall 
Aft Hook 
Hook Pivot Point 
Main Hook Lever 
Locking Shaft 
Locking Lever 

The mechanism is operated from the aft release point, 
with  both  hooks  disconnected 
and  engaged 
simultaneously  through  operation  of  the  aft  release 
mechanism. 
the  aft 
mechanism  to  the  forward  mechanism  to  enable  this 
single instantaneous operation.  

linkage  rod  connects 

  A 

The  locking  lever  (component  6)  is  twisted  110 
degrees  at  the  aft  release  point  and  this  command  is 
replicated  at  the  forward  hook  release  and  the  main 
hook  lever  (locking  cup)(component  4)  latches  or 
unlatches the release hook. 

The  current  design  of  the  system  does  not  give  the 
operator  direct  indication  that  the  forward  hook  is 
correctly  locked.  A  single  indicator  serves  both  the 
Master  (aft)  and  Slave  (forward)  locking  systems,  but 
only  the  position  of  the  aft  hook  is  positively 
indicated.  

 

Figure 1: Lifeboat hook release mechanism 

Our members’ preliminary investigation noted the following: 

♦  The  hook  release  mechanism  linkage  was  found  to  have  failed  (sheared)  -  see  Figure  2  -  at  the  forward  end  of  the 
lifeboat.  This  is  likely  (pending  final  report)  to  have  been  caused  by  misalignment  of  the  hook  during  re-attachment 
and/or fragile design of the hook release mechanism linkage; 

♦  Further inspection onboard found that the forward release mechanism linkage was severely bent (See Figure 3) in one of 

♦  As a result of the above noted damage, a total of two of four lifeboats were found to have release hooks that were not 

the other three lifeboats; 

fully engaged.  

The company has recommended that the following actions are taken : 

♦ 

Immediate inspection of all lifeboat release hook mechanisms, irrespective of design with the following pointers: 

−  Check for integrity and potential damage  

− 

Ensure that the latching mechanism is fully engaged;  

♦  Ensure that there are routine checks that all hooks are engaged prior to launch, on completion of recovery and during 

routine lifeboat inspections. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This photograph shows the linkage rod that 
sheared  on  the  forward  release  hook 
mechanism  on  the  failed  lifeboat.  With  the 
linkage  sheared,  the  lifeboat  release  hook 
was not fully engaged, resulting in the hook 
releasing.  

 

This  photograph  shows  the  release  hook 
mechanism  linkage  at  the  forward  locking 
mechanism.   

The  arrow  indicates  the  area  of  severe 
deformation  of  the  linkage  rod,  caused  by 
the misalignment of the hook and/or fragile 
design.   

line  represents  the  correct 
The  blue 
alignment  of  the 
In  this 
condition,  the  lifeboat  hooks  are  not  fully 
engaged. 

linkage  rod. 

 

  

Figure 2: Showing sheared hook release mechanism from the lifeboat that dropped 

 

 

Figure 3: Damaged hook release mechanism linkage on other lifeboats onboard 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: dropped, lifeboat, release, mechanism) 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 05/02 – Incident 1: Failure of lifeboat lowering mechanism  

IMCA SF 10/11 – Incident 2: Lifeboat drill – near casualty 

IMCA SF 13/11 – Incident 5: Failure of rescue boat release mechanism 

4  Main ROV Lift Umbilical Parted  

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  an  ROV  umbilical  parted,  resulting  in  both  the  tether  management  system 
(TMS) and ROV falling to the seabed.  The incident occurred during operations, when an ROV was being recovered from a 
dive using its winch and A-frame.  The ROV and TMS were both later successfully recovered from their known position. 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The TMS and ROV package was raised to the A frame snubber assembly using manual winch control;  

♦  Before engaging the umbilical termination socket into the latching mechanism, the latch indicator registered closed and 

the snubber skirt was in the raised position as per operating procedures;  

♦  As the umbilical termination socket (bullet) was being engaged into the latching mechanism, the umbilical parted; 

♦  Following the failure of the main umbilical, the TMS and ROV fell from the latch box. 

On further investigation of the Launch and Recovery system (LARS), the following observations were noted: 

♦  The winch was operating on the core of the drum due to an unusually short umbilical (300m).  No line-pull limit was set 
on the winch drum, which would have been appropriate given the ability of this particular winch to pull in excess of the 
umbilical breaking strength on the core of the drum; 

♦  One latch was found to be jammed in a partially open position by the mechanical flag indicator which had rotated and 

fouled on a section of the snubber frame; 

♦  Both latch indicator proximity switches were found to indicate closed latch positions when the latches were in fact only 

partially closed.  This could give a false indication on the winch remote control; 

♦  One latch operating pin was found to be bent and the latch did not action smoothly (possibly as a result of the incident). 

The causes of the incident were found to be the combined effect of: 

♦  The unrestricted line pull of the powerful winch with a very short and relatively thin umbilical (7% of drum capacity); 

♦  The improper functioning of the latches. 

Our  member  noted  that  “modern  deep  water  active  heave  compensated  winches  require  high  levels  of  installed  power  to  enable 
them  to  successfully  compensate  for  vessel  movements,  and  to  safely  recover  the  package  from  up  to  4000m.  This  capability  is 
normally  only  required  when  the  package  is  at  depth.  During  recovery  when  the  package  is  close  to  the  surface  the  winch  drum  is 
normally quite full and the effective line pull of the winch is greatly reduced. This generally prevents the maximum torque capacity of 
the winch from being applied to the umbilical when the TMS is being engaged into the latching mechanism. In this case the very short 
umbilical resulted in the maximum line pull being applied to the umbilical when the package was pulled into the A-frame snubber.” 

The following corrective actions were taken:   

♦  Modified the unique latch mechanism and indicators of this (one-off) LARS to prevent improper function/false readings; 

♦  Modified procedures to ensure maximum line pull settings are always below the breaking strain of the umbilical. 

Members may wish to consider implementing a procedure to check that line pull is below the umbilical breaking strain, and if 
necessary,  consider  fitting  some  form  of  line  pull  control.    This  is  particularly  important  in  light  of  recent  trends  towards 
powerful deep water capable winches combined with thinner, lighter umbilicals with a lower breaking strain. 

Care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  the  line  pull  of  the  winch  will  never  exceed  the  breaking  strain  of  the  umbilical,  in 
circumstances which include: 

♦  a powerful winch; 

♦  a thin umbilical; 

♦  short umbilical length. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: umbilical, ROV, TMS, dropped, parted) 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 07/05 – Incident: 1 ROV free fall incident; 

IMCA SF 11/11 – Incident: 2 Equipment damage – dropped ROV/tether management system (TMS); 

IMCA SF 06/13 – Incident: 2 Loss of ROV after umbilical termination failure and damage to ROV during recovery; 

IMCA SF 09/13 – Incident: 1High potential near miss: dropped ROV/TMS leading to equipment damage. 

5  Unplanned Vessel Contact with an Installation During Lifting Operations 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which a vessel made a very slight 
contact with an installation during lifting operations.  Only superficial paint damage was caused to the platform and the vessel. 

 
The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.31.pdf. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: 

IMCA SF 06-99 – Incident: 2 Automatic control – navigation problem; 

IMCA SF 08-12 – Incident: 4 Platform supply vessel comes into contact with fixed platform;  

IMCA SF 10-12 – Incident: 6 Collision between vessel and installation resulting in damage to both.  

6  Potential Dropped Object – Poor Housekeeping 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash regarding an incident in which a sledgehammer was found 
left  loose  on  top  of  a  Cargo  Carrying  Unit  (CCU)  whilst  it  was  being  lifted  from  a  supply  vessel  to  a  platform.    The 
sledgehammer weighed over 2kg and could have fallen 60m.  Had such an object fallen off the CCU during the lift and hit 
someone it would have caused a fatality.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-14.30..pdf 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents: (Key words, CCU, loose, lifting) 

IMCA SF 11/05 – Incident: 6 Near – miss  dropped object narrowly misses worker; 

IMCA SF 10/13 – Incident: 2 Loading and securing of cargo. 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

 

