AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 15/08 

Safety Flash

October 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Crew Member Injured During ROV Maintenance 

A  member  has  reported  an  injury  incident  which  occurred  during  a  major  refit  of  a  vessel-based  work-class  remotely 
operated vehicle (ROV) spread.  An ROV pilot technician received an injury to the chin which subsequently required a total 
of six stitches. 

The ROV crew was servicing the manipulator and had restrained the compensator spring and removed the bladder assembly.  
The  perspex  spring  housing  showed  clear  signs  of  contamination  and  it  was  decided  to  dismantle  it  further  for  cleaning 
purposes.    The  compensator  spring  housing  was  not  user  serviceable  according  to  the  Schilling  maintenance  manual.    In 
attempting to remove the spring, the stored energy in the spring was instantly released in an uncontrolled manner and in the 
process the ROV technician sustained an impact injury to the chin. 

Following investigation the following conclusions were drawn: 

  This was a high potential incident as the consequences of the uncontrolled energy release could have been much worse; 

  The instructions and warnings clearly stated in the manual were not followed; 

  Components with stored energy (mechanical and/or electrical) should always be treated with respect. 

  The  removal  of  the  compensator  spring  on  these  compensators  is  not  a  user  serviceable  task  and  units  should  be 

The company has recommended the following actions: 

returned to the manufacturer’s approved agents for servicing; 

  Ensure sufficient spares are available on each ROV spread. 

Schilling Titan 3 Manipulator: Compensator 101-4470 

 

 

2  Risk of Electrocution During Routine Work 

A member has reported a recent near-miss incident in which a crew member was very nearly electrocuted.  The incident 
occurred onboard a dive support vessel (DSV) following mobilisation, when a sub-contractor’s winch was moved between 
decks.  A sub-contractor technician had been tasked with rerouting the winch power cable (440v 3 phase) which had a plug 
at the winch end and was hard-wired into the vessel supply at the other end. 

It  proved  impractical  to  reroute  this  cable  as  it  had  been  passed  through  a  small  ‘mousehole’  in  a  sea  fastening  during 
mobilisation and the plug was too large to pass through this mousehole.  The sub-contractor technicians then attempted to 
remove  the  plug  in  order  for  the  cable  to  pass  through  the  mousehole.    During  this  process  one  of  the  sub-contractor 
technicians felt a slight shock and realised that the cable was still live.  The job was immediately stopped and their supervisor 
was called.  The supervisor immediately asked the project electrician to isolate the supply and make it safe.  The individual 
who received the shock was checked by the medic and had suffered no injuries. 

An investigation revealed the following: 

  No toolbox talk had been held before the start of the job; 

  No permit to work or electrical isolation was in place; 

  No risk assessment had been conducted or put in place; 

  Established procedures were not followed; 

  The sub-contractor personnel did not receive adequate induction when they started the job; 

  The sub-contractor personnel involved were in unfamiliar surroundings and were not fully aware of the potential hazards 

of 440v mains power; 

  There was inadequate active supervision. 

Plug after disassembly 

 

3  Uncontrolled Ascent of Spool and Diver During a Lifting Bag Operation 

A member has reported the uncontrolled ascent of a spool piece and diver during a lifting bag operation. 

In low visibility conditions, whilst preparing a pipe spool for re-positioning on the seabed using air lift bags, the spool became 
positively buoyant and started ascending to surface in an uncontrolled manner. 

The diver working at one end of the spool became entangled with the air lift bag inverter line, resulting in him ascending with 
the spool from 55msw (seabed) to 36msw. 

During  this  ascent,  the  diver’s  umbilical  was  damaged,  causing  restricted  gas  flow  and  severing  of  his  communication  and 
video cables.  He reverted to his emergency gas supply and managed to cut the line that had fouled on his bail out bottle, 
enabling him to immediately return to the seabed. 

A  second  diver,  also  working  on  the  spool  (but  still  on  the  seabed),  followed  the  umbilical  of  the  ascending  diver  and 
subsequently accompanied him back to the bell (at 47msw).  The bell was recovered for the immediate examination of the 
diver and it was confirmed that no injuries were sustained.  The spool was later re-positioned without incident. 

The member identified that the lift bags had been inflated without appropriate ‘hold back rigging’ in place and that there had 
been a failure to follow company procedures and guidance detailed in IMCA D 016 Rev. 3 – Underwater air lift bags. 

 

The member also noted that the dive plan steps had not been as clear as they should have been and that ‘installing lift bags 
complete with hold backs’ had been detailed as a single step without a check to confirm that the hold back rigging installation 
was done prior to inflating the air lift bags. 

Members are reminded of guidance document IMCA D 016 Rev. 3 – Underwater air lift bags – which addresses the initial and 
periodic examination, testing, certification and maintenance of underwater type bags (cylindrical totally enclosed, closed and 
open parachute bags) used to lift submerged objects and also addresses the operational use of open parachute type lift bags 
and the safety precautions that should be taken during their use. 

4  Near Miss Incident Involving a Diver’s Umbilical 

The  UK  Association  of  Diving  Contractors  (ADC)  has  issued  ADC  Safety  Alert  3/08  –  Very  Near  Miss  Incident  Involving  a 
Divers Umbilical – a copy of which is attached.  Although the incident occurred during a diving operation being carried out in 
UK territorial waters, the lessons learnt are relevant world-wide to both inshore and offshore diving operations.  Members 
are  reminded  of  guidance  note  IMCA  D  035  –  The  selection  of  vessels  of  opportunity  for  diving  operations  –  which  discusses 
isolations and vessel permit systems. 

 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT                                  

   

ADC Safety Alert 3/08:  

 

 

 

 

 

27th September 2008 

Very Near Miss Incident Involving a Divers Umbilical  

 
The Introduction: 

The Near Miss Incident: 

The diving contractor was involved in a salvage operation that was being carried out in UK 
territorial waters.  The diving operation formed part of a larger recovery activity requiring 
the  use  of  a  specialist,  Voith  propelled   salvage  vessel  fitted  with  heavy  lift  marine  crane.  
The  surface  support  team,  comprising  specialist  salvage  crew  and  vessel  operators, 
predominantly  of  European  origin,    were  working  alongside    the  diving  contractor  on  the 
salvage vessel. 
 
 

At  the  start  of  the  salvage  operation  a  heavy  down  line  /  working  line  was  required  to  be 
positioned to replace the thin temporary line used to mark the wreck, this would then enable 
a  secure  line  to  be  secured  to  a  fixed  point  on  the  wreck  which  would  be  used  for  the 
duration of the works. The dive was planned to be carried out during a slack water period 
and to facilitate this final preparations were completed on deck. 
 
 The    diving  supervisor  approached  the  Master  of  the  Vessel    on  the  bridge  to  seek 
permission to commence diving when the tide turned.  A Permit to Dive form used by the 
contractor was presented to the Master  for confirmation that all machinery was isolated and 
that diving was cleared to commence.  The Master checked and isolated the controls on the 
bridge and signed the permit returning it to the  diving supervisor. 
 
As soon as the tidal conditions were considered to be suitable the diver entered the water.  
Soon  after  commencing  his  descent    along  a  temporary  down  line  the  diver  informed  the 
supervisor  that  he  needed  slack  on  his  umbilical.    Slack  was  provided,  but  the  diver  
continued to struggle to overcome the pulling on the umbilical and requested further slack.  
Over the communications the supervisor proposed  terminating the dive to await a change in 
the tidal condition,  believing the tidal flow to be the primary cause of the problem, whilst 
attempting to respond the diver reported he was in difficulty and soon after  communications 
were lost.  

 
The Outcome: 

Unbeknown  to  the  Supervisor  or  the  diver  immediately  prior  to  the  event,    the  Voith 
propulsion unit adjacent to the diver, despite being isolated on the bridge – as confirmed by 
the  signed  Dive  Permit  -    was  in  fact  still  operating,    and  the  divers  umbilical  had  been 
progressively  drawn  into  the  thrusters  and  become  entangled.    Once  the  supervisor  was 
aware  what  was  occurring  he  contacted  the  bridge  and  the  emergency  shut  down  of  the 
engines  was completed. 
 
In  this  instance  the  very  alert  diver  managed  to    grab  hold  of  the  umbilical  leading  to 
surface, switched to bail out supply and cut his own umbilical before making an ascent to 

The Association represents diving contractors who are involved with inland or inshore diving operations in the UK and Ireland. 

The Association of Diving Contractors 

 

Safety Alert  03/08  (27/9/08) 

              

 

 

 

Page 2 

Observation: 

the surface where he was rendered assistance by the support team and recovered safely to 
the deck.   
 

This was a very near miss incident that could have had a very different  outcome had it not 
been for the experience of the diver or the actions taken by the supervisor. 
 
The diving contractor had correctly  attempted to implement suitable controls to  ensure that 
diving  was  safe  to  proceed  by  using  a  well  developed  Permit  to  Dive  system.          Despite 
these efforts,  there appeared to be a significant breakdown  in the  level of control applied to 
the operating machinery on the salvage vessel. 
 
During the post incident investigation it was confirmed that whilst the action on the bridge  
isolated  the  steering,  a  separate  verbal  communication  between  the  bridge  and  the  engine 
room was required to actually shut down the propulsion system. 
 

Lessons:  

The  vessel  operator  has  a  clear  responsibility  to  ensure  that,    prior  to  signing  a  Permit 
confirming that the shutdown of machinery has  occurred,   has actually been achieved. 
 
Diving supervisors whilst able to ask the appropriate questions,  may not be technically able 
to  make  physical  checks,  and  as  a  result  are  reliant  on  the  competence  and  vigilance  of  the 
more  experienced  vessel  crew  and  most  importantly  the    Master    of  Chief  Engineer  of  the 
Vessel. 
 
Whenever possible,  the isolations of key operating machinery should  result in a physical 
lock and tag out procedure the master control for which should be held by the supervisor 
whilst diving is underway. 
 
This  is  not  the  first  time  an  incident  of  this  type  has  occurred.    Until  such  times  as  the 
Association, in consultation with other specialist groups,  is able to develop and circulate clear 
recommendations and if appropriate,  guidance for Diving Contractors and Ship Operators to 
adopted in an effort to mitigate  or eliminate  the potential  machinery isolations , a high level 
of checking should be put in place when Permit to Dive Systems are being used on vessels.  In 
addition  a high level of vigilance should be adopted by those tending the divers umbilical.     
 
 
Roger O’Kane 
Secretary. 

If you have an incident or accident and have learnt lessons as a result, please advise the ADC Secretary so 

that the information can be compiled to remove specific reference to persons or organisation and 
distributed to all other members to mitigate the potential for similar incidents to occur elsewhere.  

The Association of Diving Contractors 

 

 

The Association represents diving contractors who are involved with inland or inshore diving operations in the UK and Ireland. 

