SAFETY FLASH 

   September 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 19/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1  Diver Fatality During Subsea Lifting Operations 

Note: This incident is still under investigation. 

What happened? 

During the removal of a spool at 172msw, divers were engaged in lift bag operations to relocate the spool to a wet 
store location.  During the operation a series of events occurred, which resulted in one end of the spool rising off 
the seabed in an uncontrolled manner.  The umbilical of one of the divers was caught in the lift bag rigging causing 
the diver to ascend with the spool until the spool’s ascent was arrested. 

Subsequent events resulted in the diver’s umbilical being trapped between the spool and a seabed structure, which 
resulted in the diver losing his primary breathing gas supply.  His secondary life support (SLS) was deployed and 
seems to have operated correctly, however this did not prevent the fatality. 

Detailed and exhaustive investigations into the cause of the incident are ongoing in collaboration with the relevant 
authorities and the client.   

Our member made the following interim recommendations: 

All diving activities should be risk assessed and planned.  The risk assessment and planning should include all key 
personnel involved in the work to be undertaken.  Plans (methodology/working instructions) should be documented, 
unambiguous, authorised and communicated to everyone involved. 

All aspects of the diving operations should be properly supervised.  This includes ensuring that the risks involved, 
work to be done and emergency procedures are communicated to the divers before starting work at the dive site 
and thereafter, before each dive. 

Ensure  that  the  dive  site  is  continuously  monitored  for  changes  to  the  task  or  conditions.    If  new  hazards  are 
identified  or  control  measures  are  inadequate,  work  should  be  stopped,  and  the  situation  reassessed  and,  if 
necessary, amended, before starting again.  

Review and reinforce individual and collective responsibilities with regard to the management of equipment safety 
lines/tie backs, lift bags (parachutes) and diver umbilical and every individual’s duty to apply the ‘stop work policy’. 

Members should be aware that Guidance on open parachute type underwater air lift bags (IMCA D 016) addresses 
the operational use of open parachute type underwater air lift bags and the safety precautions that should be taken 
during their use. 

Members may also wish to review Guidelines for Management of Change (IMCA SEL 001) and Guidance on Open 
Parachute Type Underwater Air Lift Bags (IMCA LR 007, D 016). 

 
Further incidents involving lift bags can be found on the IMCA website. 

A few of these are noted here:  

 

Incident During Lift Bag Operations (Feb 2003) 

  Uncontrolled Ascent – Loss Of Lift Bag To Surface (May 2010) 

  Uncontrolled Ascent Of Lift Bag (June 2012) 

  Near Miss: Failure Of Subsea Lifting Equipment (July 2017) 

2 

Two ‘Accident Advisories’ Relating to Diver Fatalities 

The Workplace Safety and Health Council of Singapore (WSHC) has released two ‘accident advisory’ notices relating 
to two recent diver fatalities. 

Incident 1: diver struck by falling concrete pile 

A diver was struck and subsequently killed by a falling concrete pile.  Two divers were installing brackets onto a 
concrete pile underwater, when an adjacent concrete pile collapsed and struck one of them, pinning him against 
the seabed.  He was rescued and conveyed to hospital, where he later died from his injuries. 

Further information can be found on the WSHC website. 

Incident 2: diver drowned 

A commercial diver went missing while cleaning the hull of a vessel underwater.  His body was eventually found 
two days later.  

Further information can be found on the WSHC website. 

