AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/11 

Safety Flash 

July 2011 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Person Fell after Safety Lanyard Failed 

Information has been passed to IMCA regarding the possible failure of a certain kind of safety lanyard owing to manufacturing 
defects.  

The working at height equipment manufacturer, Petzl, reported that a climber fell to the ground while recreational climbing 
in  France.  According  to  the  latest  information  available,  the  accident  appears  to  have  been  the  result  of  a  manufacturing 
defect of the Petzl SCORPIO lanyard.  The defect consisted of a missing safety stitch (bar tack) on the attachment loop. 

Equipment  of  this  sort  is  used  by  some  IMCA  members.    All  members  are  encouraged  to  pass  this  information  to  the 
appropriate personnel and instigate appropriate checks of any similar equipment.  

Further information is available from:  

www.petzl.com/en/security-alert-0/2011/05/19/request-immediate-self-inspection-all-absorbica-energy-absorbers  

An inspection procedure has been developed by the manufacturer and can be found from: 

www.petzl.com/files/fckfiles/image/news/sport/produits/scorpio/ABSORBICA-VERIFICATION-PROCESS-EN.pdf  

2  Confined Space – Multiple Fatalities 

IMCA has received information about a confined space incident in there were multiple fatalities.  The incident occurred at an 
oil well on land.  A workman entered a water tank that contained water mixed with nitrogen, and collapsed. A co-worker 
entered after him in an attempt to rescue him, and likewise collapsed. He was followed by two further workers who also 
collapsed.  

Water tank where incident occurred 

 

The supervisor realised that four workers were inside the tank, gave orders to drain the tank and then asked two further 
personnel to enter the tank for rescue purposes using safety lines.  

Three of the rescued personnel were found unconscious and one semi-conscious.  All four were evacuated to a nearby clinic 
for first aid and then to hospital for further treatment.  The three men found unconscious did not recover and were declared 
dead by a local doctor. 

Investigation revealed the following: 

  Procedures were not followed 

–  There was no permit to work for confined space entry arranged in this case; 
–  There were no multi-gas tests conducted (LEL, O2, CO2 and H2S) before confined space entry. 
– 
–  The rescue attempt was not properly planned or thought through.   

Personnel did not wear appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) for task; 

Members are reminded that IMCA has dealt with both confined spaces and  permits to work in the following pocket safety 
cards;  

 

 

IMCA SPC 09  Confined spaces can be deadly; 

IMCA SPC 18  Permit to work. 

3  Confined Space – Multiple Fatality  

An incident has been drawn to IMCA’s attention in which one man died and two men had to be hospitalised following entry 
into a confined space.  The incident occurred when the  chief officer had decided to control the valves of the slop tanks on 
the  following  day,  and  required  the  bosun  to  open  the  access  hatches  in  order  to  start  ventilation  of  the  slop  tanks  to 
prepare for ‘gas free’.  Shortly afterwards, personnel heard a noise as if an object had fallen into the tank.  The chief officer 
came to the starboard slop tank and saw the bosun lying unconscious on the middle platform,  5.2 meters below the main 
deck.  The chief officer immediately entered the tank with the intention of helping him. Further crew members arrived at the 
slop tank and saw the chief officer trying to wake the bosun up. Assistance and a stretcher was called for, and one crewman 
remained and then entered into the tank in order to help the chief officer. 

All three persons became unconscious in the tank.  Shortly thereafter the second officer started preparations for entering 
safely into the starboard slop tank.  A portable fan was fitted to the slop tank in order to accelerate the ventilation. In the 
meantime  the  atmosphere  inside  the  tank  was  measured  by  a  portable  gas  analyser.    The  device  went  off  to  indicate  the 
existence of the H2S in the tank. The read values were O2: 20, CO: 0, H2S: 60 and LEL: 0. Then the second officer put on a 
BA set and entered the slop tank.  Afterwards the crewman, the chief officer and the bosun were all lifted out of the tank. 
The  crewman  and  the  chief  officer  were  hospitalised  and  made  a  full  recovery.  Unfortunately  the  bosun  could  not  be 
resuscitated and died. 

 

 

Entrance to slop tank in which incident occurred 

 

 
Following investigation, the following points were noted: 

  The bosun had fallen into the slop tank for unknown reasons; 

  The chief officer entered into the tank impulsively ignoring the safety rules completely and acting emotionally to help his 

  The crewman also reacted emotionally rather than logically and entered the tank to assist the chief officer to rescue the 

colleague; 

bosun; 

  The  recovery  operation,  including  identified  the  danger  caused  by  the  accumulated  gas  in  the  tank,  the  rescue  of  the 
victims from the tank, the application of the first aid treatment and the helicopter medevac was carried out successfully 
and professionally in accordance with company procedures; 

  There was inadequate understanding of how this lethal concentration of H2S had been produced in the slop tanks. 

      

 

 

 

4  Failed  Chain Link  Catastrophic Failures in Mooring System 

The  Bureau  of  Ocean  Energy  Management  Regulations  &  Enforcement  (BOEMRE)  has  published  Safety  Alert  No.  296 
(attached) regarding the catastrophic failure of a chain link in a mooring system, which could have put a floating structure  at 
risk. 

In the incident, a single point mooring system failed at the tether chain for a free-standing hybrid riser, allowing the buoyancy 
air can and the free-standing flow line riser to separate.  The 440-ton buoyancy air can rose suddenly to the surface while the 
free standing riser collapsed. 

Further information can be found at www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_296.pdf  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

