AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/16 

Safety Flash 

  April 2016 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

1  August 2013 Super Puma Helicopter Crash 

The UK Air Accident Investigation Branch (AAIB) has published a report into the fatal accident to Eurocopter AS332 
L2 Super Puma, call-sign G-WNSB, on its approach to Sumburgh Airport in the Shetland Islands on 23 August 2013. 

At 17:17 hrs UTC on 23 August 2013, an AS332 L2 Super Puma helicopter with 16 passengers and two crew on board 
crashed into the sea during an approach to land at Sumburgh Airport.  Four of the passengers did not survive.  The 
flight  was  transporting employees of the UK offshore oil and gas industry  back  to Aberdeen,  and was calling at 
Sumburgh Airport to refuel. 

The AAIB investigation identified the following causal factors in the accident: 

  The helicopter’s flight instruments were not monitored effectively during the latter stages of the non-precision 
instrument approach.  This allowed the helicopter to enter a critically low energy state, from which recovery 
was not possible; 

  Visual references had not been acquired by the Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA) and no effective action was 

taken to level the helicopter, as required by the operator’s procedure for an instrument approach. 

The following contributory factors were identified: 

  The operator’s standard operating procedure (SOP) for this type of approach was not clearly defined and the 

pilots had not developed a shared, unambiguous understanding of how the approach was to be flown; 

  The operator’s SOP at the time did not optimise the use of the helicopter’s automated systems during a Non-

Precision Approach; 

  The decision to fly a 3-axes with V/S mode, decelerating approach in marginal weather conditions did not make 
optimum use of the helicopter’s automated systems and required closer monitoring of the instruments by the 
crew; 

  Despite the poorer than forecast weather conditions at Sumburgh Airport, the commander had not altered his 

expectation of being able to land from a Non-Precision Approach. 

A comprehensive report is available here:  www.gov.uk/aaib-reports/aircraft-accident-report-aar-1-2016-g-wnsb-
23-august-2013 

