Safety Flash 

May 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

Theme: Safety in Diving Operations 

In the first incident, a Deadman Anchor (DMA) toppled over, trapping and injuring a diver.  In this case, the DMA 
was top-heavy and unfit for purpose.  The second incident, a near miss, involved an air leak on a transfer under 
pressure (TUP) system, the cause of which was a damaged O ring. 

In the third incident, a member highlights the importance of correct identification by divers, of jobs and worksites.  
The fourth incident addresses the need for care with water jetting.  The last, a high potential near miss, involves a 
gas release from a pipeline under repair by divers.  

1 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): DMA Toppled Over, Injuring a Diver 

What happened?  A DMA toppled over, trapping a diver on the seabed and causing an injury to his leg.  The incident 
occurred whilst a diving support vessel (DSV) was working on preparation to install a closing spool.  Three DMAs 
were  being  deployed  to  use  static  and  mechanical  hold  backs  attached  to  the 
spool.    Two  DMAs  were  deployed  by  the  DSV.    The  third  had  been  previously 
deployed and wet stored by a 3rd party vessel.  The DSV had no involvement in the 
deployment to the seabed of this third Deadman anchor (DMA3), but upon arriving 
on site found it to be placed in the correct location and decided to use it rather 
than deploy the DMA identified on the approved dive plan.  

Deadman  Anchor  (DMA):  A 
clump  weight  which  sits  on 
the  seabed  and  is  used  as  a 
temporary  anchor  point  for 
seabed construction activity. 

Holdbacks were attached to DMA3 and as Diver 2 took up the slack in the rigging, 
it toppled over, trapping the diver on the seabed by his left leg.  Diver 1 went to his assistance and helped free him. 

Both divers made their way safely back to the bell and were recovered to surface.  After decompression, diver 2 
was flown ashore to hospital and was diagnosed with a fracture of the fibula and a torn ankle ligament.  The diver 
has since made a full recovery and is expected to return to his normal work activities. 

DMA as identified in procedures 

DMA3 that toppled over 

 

  

 

 

 
What were the causes? 

in company procedures; 

  DMA3 that toppled over (blue DMA, right hand image) was different in weight and design from the one required 

  DMA3 had a very narrow footprint and tall body with a high centre of gravity, making it unstable and unsuitable 

for rigging under tension and deploying in an upright position; 

  The dive plan identified deployment of a 10te DMA (yellow DMA, left hand image).  However, the team decided 

to use the one deployed by the 3rd party vessel; 

  Whilst this was convenient, no check was made to ascertain whether or not it was fit for purpose; 

  No management of change (MoC) process was initiated, and the risk of this DMA toppling was not identified. 

Our member suggested that the following things went wrong: 

  Existing procedures and risk assessments for the use of subsea DMAs were too generic;  

  There was a ‘change’ which introduced an increased risk.  However, the level of risk presented by the use of 

DMA3 was not adequately assessed and was perceived as being low; 

  DMA3 was procured and sent offshore [by others] for another task.  It was identified subsequently that DMA3 
was in fact a crane counterweight and was not the most suitable piece of equipment for the task it was being 
used for; 

  The lifting points on DMA3 were located on the top of the weight and it could only be deployed in the vertical 

position, offering a small footprint and high centre of gravity; 

  The  rigging  arrangement  placed  the  diver  in  close  proximity  to  DMA3  during  attachment,  adjustment  and 

detachment; 

  There was a level of complacency within the offshore team – the hazards associated with the non-standard 

DMA3 were not immediately recognised and therefore not considered; 

•  The root cause identified was that the risk management process for the use of DMA3 was not effectively utilised 

and the work team risk perception on this occasion was poor. 

Our member identified the following lessons learnt 

There were a number of opportunities to prevent this incident taking place, starting with the onshore engineering 
team that sourced DMA3, the on-board supervisors who decided to use it and the divers who were working around 
it.   The team were confronted by a change  (different DMA design) which they failed to properly recognise  and 
manage.  There was a degree of complacency and poor perception of risk among all of the parties involved. 

The company has a safe system of work that could have and should have compensated for inadequate equipment 
and stopped operations before the incident occurred.  These systems failed in this instance. 

Actions taken 

While there are a number of actions specific to DMA operations, a great deal of focus has been put on behaviours 
and task supervision, captured in a vessel specific improvement plan. 

  DMA rigging to be altered to allow divers to be outside of the DMA footprint; 

  Appropriate review of company documentation and procedures (to include DMA design specification and diver 

positioning) and also of the MoC process; 

 

Information sharing – video footage and details to be shared for training purposes. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search word: DMA): 

IMCA SF 11/01 – Incident 2 – Dead man anchor supplied unfit for purpose; 

IMCA SF 10/12 – Incident 1 – Diver injured during subsea lifting operations. 

 

 

 

 
2  Diving Bell TUP O Ring Seal Damage  

What happened 

During the locking on of the diving bell to the saturation system on a 
DSV,  difficulty was encountered in closing the locking clamp.  After a 
few attempts, the clamp was successfully closed and the interlock pin 
inserted proving correct closure of the clamp.  During pressurisation of 
the trunking a leak was detected, the pressurisation stopped, and the 
clamp opened up for further inspection and fault finding.  A damaged O 
ring was discovered and changed out.  The bell was then successfully 
mated and the divers transferred to the living chambers. 

What went wrong? 

When the bell was trolleyed back and access platforms raised to access 
the sealing faces, the O ring seal was found to have been damaged.  The 
O ring had become displaced prior to the bell mating, and a section of 
the O ring had come out of its groove.  When the bell was mated, the O 
ring prevented the two faces from coming into correct alignment and 
the clamp would not close fully to allow the interlock to engage.  During 
repeated clamp closures, the O ring was damaged but pushed back into 
the groove and until the clamp closed fully and the interlock engaged.  
The subsequent pressurisation procedure proved there was a leak past 
the O ring and the bell mating was ceased and the leak investigated. 

What were the causes of the incident? 

The incident was caused by the damage to an O ring which had become 
misplaced.  The O ring seal had not been fully inspected either by sight 
or  touch  before  the  bell 
lock  off  and  reconnection,  and  this 
misplacement had not been identified. 

Access to carry out this full inspection was difficult requiring working at 
height equipment and was only carried out on a scheduled basis and not 
every bell run. 

Lessons learnt and actions taken 

 

Lesson: Bell mating flanges and seals should be inspected between every bell run to ensure they are in correct 
location and in good condition;  

  Actions taken:  

  a process is now in place requiring the inspection and recording of the bell mating flange faces and seals; 
  access  has  been  improved  to  carry  out  this  task  without  the  need  for  specialist  work  methods  and 

associated personal protective equipment (PPE). 

Members may also wish to refer to IMCA SF 10/04 – Incident 1 – Uncontrolled decompression of diving bell. 

 

 

 

 
3  Diver’s Worksite Identification Errors 

A member reports continued worksite identification errors by divers.  This is in spite of a significant reduction in 
such errors following improved engineering procedures and the application of operational good practice.  Mistakes 
are still being made, primarily when returning to the worksite after an initial correct identification. 

Example 1: 

During a recent dive, a Tronic connector was correctly identified by the diver on the panel with its corresponding 
jumper tail labelled back from the connector.   Positive confirmation was provided by the team in Dive Control. 
There followed an unsuccessful attempt to loosen and remove this connector with a C-spanner. 

In order to provide more leverage, it was decided to try a strap wrench so the diver moved away from the worksite 
to collect this tool.  Crucially, the C-spanner was left on a different but adjacent connector and when the  diver 
returned with the strap wrench he mistook this connector for the one previously identified.  The error went un-
noticed and the diver removed and cleaned the wrong connector.  

 

 

The mistake was noticed while preparing to connect the jumper to the wrong port as the colours did not match. 
The job was immediately stopped and a “Time Out For Safety” held, before retracing the steps and continuing with 
the correct Tronic connector. 

At no time was the diver or equipment at risk as the power was isolated. 

 

 

 

 
Example 2: 

Planned operations for removal of a section of pipework from a flange took two dives.  The section to be removed 
was correctly identified during Dive number 1, but after bell turnaround and the meal break, during Dive 2, the 
incorrect flange was identified and the wrong bolts were removed. 

After several bolts had been removed, the Dive Supervisor called an “All Stop”, as it was identified that work was 
being conducted on the wrong flange.  A “Time Out for Safety” was called to discuss actions already taken and to 
agree the further actions needed.  At no time were the divers or equipment at risk as the Pipeline End Manifold 
was shut down. 

Our member notes that both of these recent incidents have their own set of contributory factors such as inadequate 
handover between Dive Supervisors in the second example, but both events featured identical failings which were 
consistent with previous incidents. 

 

 

Increase focus/attention in setting up for worksite identification; 

  Procedures and task plans should include steps to positively identify and mark the specific item to be worked 

  Dive  Supervisors  should  ensure  the  specific  item  to be  worked on  is  positively  identified  and  appropriately 

marked for intervention; 

  Should  the  worksite  be  left,  even  momentarily,  the  item  to  be  worked  on  should  be  reacquired  and  again 

positively identified before work resumes. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents:  

 

IMCA SF 23/16 – Incident 3 – Dropped object fell from crane – poor communication/lack of awareness/control 
of work: 
  a job had to be left half-finished but this was not properly communicated or handed over - a causal factor 

was poor communication, particularly at shift handover; 

 

IMCA SF 33/16 – Incident 5 – First aid injury – electric shock: 

 

the injured person mistakenly accessed the wrong transformer cabinet and got an electric shock.  A lesson 
learnt identified was the importance of clear labelling and the ability of crew to differentiate between 
similar sets of co-located equipment. 

Actions: 

on; 

 

LTI: Leg Injury Caused During HP Water Jetting 

 
4 

What happened? 

During diving operations to clean a riser with a HP water jet type 
Cavitek, a diver cut his leg (thigh) with the water jet. 

The incident occurred whilst the diver was not properly secured 
during  the  cleaning  operation.    The  diver  should  always  be 
comfortably  and  securely  positioned  during  HP  water  jetting 
operations.    It  is  especially  important  to  ensure  that  this  is  so 
during mid-water work, otherwise there  is a greater likelihood 
that the diver may lose control of the trajectory of the jet stream 
during jetting operations.   The  likelihood of such an event will 
also be increased if the retro jet and forward jet on the gun is 
strongly unbalanced. 

Our member notes that there was an incorrect calculation of the 
HP  hose  length  needed  for  this  job.    The  minimum  length  of  hose  required  per  jetting  gun  unit  is  normally 
considered to be 1.5 times the maximum anticipated working depth.  The length of the hose should not impact 
upon the comfort and security of the diver during HP water jetting operations. 

The length of the waterjet lance may not have been appropriate (too short).  The inherent potential for accidental 
self-injury during use of high pressure jetting guns increases as the length of lance (barrel) decreases. 

IMCA D 049 – Code of practice for the use of high pressure jetting equipment by divers states: 

“Hoses should be tied off at convenient locations to assist in minimising movement due to pressure supply changes 
or tidal/current movement.  

Hoses should never be tied off to any part of any diving equipment.” 

Key Lessons Learned 

  Before water jetting operations: 

  ensure proper and dedicated tool box talks are held 
  ensure there us a full assessment of risks and needs at the work area 
  check the required length of hose; 

  When cleaning vertical parts of structures in mid-water divers should be rigged to be stable and comfortable 

for jetting operations; 

  Check that the gun is appropriately designed, properly balanced, well-maintained and fit for purpose; 

  Ensure the diver holds the gun with two (2) hands; 

  Stop/release the trigger before each movement. 

  Ensure regular communication from the diver to the dive supervisor about the situation at depth; 

  Remind the dive team of the importance of good communications and consistent observance of safe working 

practices.  

Water jetting incidents: 

 

 

 

 

 

IMCA SF 05/11 – Incident 5 – Diver safety – high pressure water jetting operations; 

IMCA SF 03/15 – Incident 2 – Diver sustains water jetting injury; 

IMCA SF 12/16 – Incident 2 – Lost time injury (LTI): serious hand injury during high pressure washing operations; 

IMCA SF 19/16 – Incident 4 – Restricted work case (RWC): injury to eye during deck washing. 

 
5  Near Miss: Gas Release from Subsea Pipeline 

A  member  has  reported  a  near 
miss incident in which there was an 
unplanned  release  of  gas  from  a 
subsea pipeline, when divers were 
working  nearby.    A  vessel  was 
engaged 
in  connecting  a  32” 
(81cm)  spool  to  the  pipeline  with 
the vessel crane connected to the 
spool.   Divers were  in  the  bell  for 
changeover  of  shift. 
  Suddenly 
there was a release of gas near to 
the  vessel. 
  The  Master  took 
immediate action and moved the vessel 150m out of the area; the clearing crane wire was slacked off, and at a safe 
distance when no bubbles were observed in the water, the ROV was launched.  The ROV went to the crane hook 
location, and the crane hook was released safely.  ROV and crane wire was recovered without any damage to any 
property.  The divers were unharmed.  

Initial investigation records the following: 

  An energy isolation permit was in place which was issued by the refinery and platform; 

  The refinery failed to inform the vessel about the valve opening and expected gas flow down the pipeline. 

Our member noted the following: 

  There should be proper communication established between the refinery and the vessel before opening any 

valves and permitting gas flow down the pipeline; 

  The vessel should be ready always to face any H2S emergency at site;  

  Drills for H2S emergency, general muster, abandon ship and LARS bell recovery should be carried out regularly; 

  H2S detectors and appropriate PPE should be tested periodically. 

IMCA notes that the importance of a properly understood and properly communicated Permit to Work process 
cannot  be  over-emphasised,  particularly  in  high  potential  incidents  such  as  this,  and  where  communication 
between remote sites may be at a premium. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

 

IMCA SF 01/04 – Incident 2 – Gas release from pipeline during diving operations. 

 

