AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 10/16 

Safety Flash 

  April 2016 

 

 

 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

Focus: Incidents during Mooring and Cargo Handling 

In  this  safety  flash  we  cover  three  mooring  incidents  and  an  incident  during  cargo  operations.    In  three  of  the 
incidents, no-one ‘stopped the job’ when working conditions had become unsafe.  Readers are reminded of IMCA’s 
guidance material as follows: 

IMCA SEL 029 – Mooring practice safety guidance for offshore vessels when alongside in ports and harbours; 

IMCA SEL 032 – Guidance on safety in shipyards. 

IMCA also provides a wide range of safety promotional material including pocket cards, posters and DVDs on topics 
such as mooring, toolbox talks, risk assessment, permit to work, and hazard identification, which can be found here. 

1  Vessel in Collision with Floating Dock  

A member has reported an incident in which a multi-purpose support vessel (MPSV) made contact with a section 
of a floating dock and buckled a steel fender and the main deck forward centre of the dock.  The incident occurred 
as the MPSV was being towed by two tugs (one forward, one aft) to a graving dock. 

As the vessel was proceeding towards the dock, the dock master was contacted by the pilot with a request to send 
two working boats to meet the MPSV, to replace the forward tug.  The dock master disagreed with this, as the local 
arrangements were that working boats were only to assist towing around 200m from the dry dock.  The forward 
tug disconnected and sailed away without prior notification.  Efforts made by the pilot to communicate with the 
master of the forward tug were not successful.  The master of the aft tug refused to reposition to push the MPSV 
from its starboard side, as they were informed that the water was too shallow (8m depth).  Thereafter, the vessel 
drifted to starboard towards the floating dock, collided with it and caused material damage.  There were no injuries. 

 

 

 
 Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  A plan was in place to tow the MPSV to a graving dock.  The tugs did not arrive as planned and were late.  When 
the first pilot arrived on board, he refused to engage tugs due to the condition of the vessel at the time – only 
the emergency engines were running; 

  The vessels forward and aft thrusters were non-operational due to ongoing repairs; 

  The  deck  crew  and  officers  carried out  a  toolbox  talk  as  well  as  a  risk  assessment  on towing,  mooring  and 

unmooring operations; 

  The MPSV was docked starboard side to quay, before delivery to the dockyard; 

  The  pilot  was informed about  the  status of  the  MPSV.   He  assured the crew  that  ‘he was  familiar with the 

dockyard operations, and that the proposed delivery will be carried out successfully’. 

Our member made the following recommendations: 

  Better and more comprehensive risk assessment for docking operations; 

 

‘Stop work authority’ should be implemented and enforced on board if any task is perceived to be unsafe; 

  Pre-task planning meeting with all work parties should be mandatory before start of towing/docking tasks. 

Members may find it helpful to further consider the relationships between different working parties in shipyards, 
as discussed in IMCA SEL 032 – Guidance on safety in shipyards. 

2  Damage to Hand Rails during Mooring Operations 

A member has reported a minor vessel collision resulting in damage to hand rails.  The incident occurred during 
mooring operations between a vessel and a barge for the purposes of transferring a passenger to the barge.  The 
vessel started side by side mooring operations and, when approaching the barge, the bow of the vessel came into 
contact with the hand rails on the barge causing slight damage. 

Showing the barge (left) without Yokohama fenders 

Showing the damage to the hand rails of the barge 

 

 

in place 

Our member noted the following: 

place; 

  The barge master gave permission for mooring alongside the barge without having any Yokohama fenders in 

  The vessel bridge team did not identify this and continued with mooring – no-one stopped the job. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: mooring): 

 

IMCA SF 07/15 – Incident 4 – Minor damage to pontoon cleat during Crew Transfer Vessel Mooring Operations. 

 
3 

Equipment Damaged during Cargo Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a filled drilling cutting box (DCB) was punctured during transfer onto 
the deck of a supply vessel.  The DCB was damaged, with the side being punctured from a protruding angle iron 
bracket on an adjacent container.  The DCB contained sand and an amount of oily water.  The supply vessel Master 
decided  to  backload  the  container  onto  the  platform  and,  upon  lifting  it,  the  oily  water  spilled  out  from  the 
punctured area. This resulted in a minor spillage onto deck. 

Showing punctured area of the DCB (circled) 

Showing minor spillage on the deck 

 

 

Our member noted the following: 

  There was inadequate risk assessment for the emergency response to the spillage; 

  There was no consideration given to potential release of oily water to the deck prior to backloading; 

  Returning the container to the platform was against company procedures which state:“The vessel Master is 
responsible for the safe and correct loading of his vessel and should liaise with the OIM (client representative on 
the installation) to ensure that the vessel is loaded correctly. The master should notify the OIM of defective lifts 
and return these to the installation only if it is safe to do so”; 

  No-one stopped the job. 

The main lessons identified were: 

  The Master has overriding authority to make decisions on the vessel; his action in this particular case, should 
have  been  to  arrange  sealing  of  the  punctured  area  of  the  DCB  with  suitable  materials  to  prevent  further 
spillage to deck; 

  Better communications between the Master and platform Offshore Installation Manager (OIM) should have 

been in in place. 

 Members may wish to refer to the following incident (search word: cargo): 

 

IMCA SF 15/15 – Incident 3 – Spillage of methanol during cargo operations. 

4  Mooring Near Miss: Lines Break during Un-Docking Operation 

The  Danish  safety  organisation  Seahealth.dk  has  circulated  a  near  miss  incident  in  which  lines  parted  during 
undocking operations.  A vessel’s mooring lines (double braided synthetic fibre rope 65mm) were used as tug lines 
(two lines connected to one tug).  When the vessel dropped off all the lines from the berth, the tug started pulling 
the vessel.  After about three minutes the two lines parted.  There were no crew standing in the area where the tug 
line was connected.  There were no injuries and no damage to the vessel except for the two failed mooring lines. 

It will be understood that the potential consequence of this incident could have been a fatality. 

 
Investigation  revealed  that  the  mooring  ropes  bore  no  sign  of  damage  prior  to  the  incident,  and  had  been  in 
operation since delivery of the vessel in 2005.  The same vessel had seven other mooring lines in use of that age. 

Members may wish to refer to the following: 

  Safety Flash – SF 04-09 – Incident 3 – Mooring incidents from the UK P&I Club; 

 

 

IMCA Safety Poster – SPP 12 – Mooring safety; 

IMCA DVD – SEL 038 – Mooring. 

