AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 17/15 

Safety Flash 

 October 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Focus: lifeboats 

1  High Potential Near Miss: Failure of Lifeboat Release Hook Mechanism   

A member has reported a high potential near miss incident involving the failure of a lifeboat release hook mechanism.  The 
incident occurred during post maintenance testing of the davit brake.  The forward release hook opened resulting in the lifeboat 
being suspended partially on its fall preventer device. 

The release hook system in place on board the vessel was of the Nishi-F Company on/off load release type.  The basic overview 
of the system is shown in Figure 1 below, with the components noted. 

 

Item 

Component 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Hook 

Side Plate 

Round Handle 

Lever 

Latch 

Operation Cable 

Suspension Ring 

 

Figure 1:  Basic overview of lifeboat release hook 

Components  

To release the lifeboat, a crew member in the lifeboat pulls a locking handle bar upwards and whilst holding the handle bar in 
the lifted position, operates the release.  In consequence the hook units on the forward and aft are simultaneously released 
from the suspension rings as the operation cable manipulates the lever.  See figure 2 below. 

Figure 2:  Showing operation unit 

Figure 3:  Showing end of failed cable 

 

 

 
In this instance the boat was successfully released from the stowed position as per normal operating procedure, and lowered 
to the embarkation deck.  The boat was sitting at the embarkation deck for approximately five seconds when the forward hook 
released, resulting in the boat dropping approximately 30 cm before coming to rest on the safety shackle (fall preventer device). 

Our member’s preliminary investigation noted the following: 

  The operation cable was found to have failed at the forward end of the lifeboat.  This was likely due to its age, in service 
use, and the inability to adequately monitor its condition.  The cable terminates into a M6 thread; and the failure occurred 
directly at the locking nut – see Figure 3; 

  With the condition of the operation cable it was unclear if the hook was not properly reset, or failed under load at this 

time; 

  The  vessel  had  not  yet  undergone  the  manufacturer’s  modification  to  the  on-load  release  system  in  accordance  with 
International Maritime Organization (IMO) MSC 1/Circ 1392 – Guidelines for evaluation and replacement of lifeboat release 
and retrieval systems. 

Our member recommended the following actions: 

  Check the arrangements on the remaining hooks; 

  Examination of lifeboat hook release mechanisms, irrespective of design to check for integrity and potential damage; 

  Ensure that procedures, toolbox talks, risk assessments relating to the launch, recovery, and routine inspection of lifeboats 

adequately ensured that routine checks were made of the hook release mechanism. 

It  should  be  noted  that  in  this  instance  the  fall  preventer  device  reduced  the  consequence  of  the  failure;  this  was  a  good 
reminder, not only of the importance of their use, but that they should also be inspected and maintained.   

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents (search words: release, hook): 

 

IMCA SF 13/14 Incident. 3 – Failure of lifeboat release hook mechanism. 

2  Free-Fall Lifeboat Safety  

The  Australian  Maritime  Safety  Authority  (AMSA)  has  published  Marine  Notice  15/2015  regarding  two  recent  incidents 
involving the inadvertent or accidental release of free-fall lifeboats.  The investigations conducted by the Australian Transport 
Safety Bureau (ATSB) and the New Zealand Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TIAC) have highlighted ongoing 
safety issues related to free-fall lifeboats and identified maintenance issues that may be of interest to members. 

Click here to download the notice.  

The following AMSA presentation on – Operation of lifeboats and safety would also be of interest. 

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents (search words: lifeboat): 

IMCA SF 10-11 Incident. 2 – Lifeboat drill – Near casualty; 

IMCA SF 09-12 Incident. 1 – Inadvertent lowering of lifeboat; 

IMCA SF 13-14 Incident. 3 – Failure of lifeboat release hook mechanism. 

 

 

 

 

  

