AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/02 

July 2002 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Power Management System Dynamic Positioning (DP) Incident 

We have received the following information from a member regarding a power management system (PMS) fault which led to 
a DP station keeping incident on one of its vessels.  This safety flash outlines the incident, the learnings from the incident and 
the member’s recommendations. 

1  Operational Status 

At the time of the incident, the member’s vessel was engaged in routine saturation diving operations and two divers were 
deployed working inside a subsea jacket within the 500 m zone.  The weather conditions were moderate with a wind speed 
of 30 knots. 

The vessel was operating in DP Class 2 with two 2 stern azimuth thrusters and two bow thrusters running with all enabled in 
the DP system.  Three diesel generators were running with the bus tie closed and the other generator was on standby. 

The  reference  systems  in  use  at  the  time  were  a  DGPS,  the  port  and  starboard  tautwires  and  a  hydroacoustic  reference 
system. 

2  The Incident 

At 1000 hours, due to the increasing weather conditions, a decision was made to start another bow thruster and at 1007 
hours the engineers operated the breaker to start the thruster.  However, it failed to start and within 10 seconds the two 
stern azimuth thrusters indicated ‘not ready’ and stopped.  The power management system was checked which confirmed 
that the two stern azimuth thrusters were not in operation.  The vessel started to move ahead under the influence of the 
wind and seas that were from astern. 

The  Red  Abandon  Dive  Alarm  was  activated  and  the  divers  commenced  returning  to  the  bell.    The  vessel  Master,  upon 
hearing the alarm, went to the bridge.  The dynamic positioning operator (DPO) changed to DP manual control of the vessel. 
By this time, the vessel was down wind from her intended position some 15 metres off the platform. 

One  of  the  stern  azimuth  thrusters  started  and  the  DPO  was  able  to  gain  some  control  by  using  full  thrust  astern  and 
selecting yaw to control heading.  The other stern azimuth thruster attempted to start causing both stern azimuth thrusters 
to stop.  One stern azimuth thruster again started and the engineers were instructed to leave the situation as it was but the 
power management again tried to start the other stern azimuth thruster leading to both units again stopping. 

The port and starboard tautwires and bow beacon were deployed ahead of the vessel so that the above movements did not 
make them out of limits at any time therefore they were always available as references. 

This sequence of events covered approximately six minutes and resulted in the vessel being a maximum of 40 metres from 
her  intended  location  before  being  driven  back  some  10  metres  towards  the  divers.    At  approximately  1016 hours  the 
situation was stabilised.  The divers were recovered to the bell and the bell was recovered to surface. 

Safety Flash 

 

3  Conclusions as to the Cause 

The incident is considered to have been caused by a failure of the timer in the bow thruster when starting it which lead to an 
overcurrent on the bus bar, which, due to the proximity of the control cables of the control system board to the bus bar, 
caused a partial failure in one of three cards on the control system board. 

Two  of  these  control  system  cards  initiated  the  start/stop  sequence  for  the  vessel’s  thrusters.    It  was  expected  that  if  a 
failure occurred on a card the system would fail safe and maintain the status quo, i.e. if thrusters were operating they would 
continue to operate and the fault in the card would be indicated to the operator. 

The situation was further exacerbated by the fact that the control system cards were not sufficiently segregated and that the 
damaged  card  contained  the  control  functions  for  both  stern  azimuth  thrusters  which  were  shut  down  as  a  result  of  this 
incident. 

The DP FMEA for the vessel was reviewed as part of the investigation and it was found that it did not identify the above 
single point failure.  Neither had this fact been identified internally or during annual DP trials and audits which the vessel had 
undergone  since  the  FMEA  was  first  written.    The  FMEA  has  been  regularly  reviewed  since  first  being  produced  and  the 
document was on its fifth revision. 

Until the incident, it had been considered that a failure of this type was not possible on board the vessel.  

4  Recommendations 

As  a  result  of  the  incident  and  the  findings  of  the  investigation,  the  company  involved  has  identified  a  number  of 
recommendations which are set out below: 

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

The control system cards should be reconfigured to bring about a suitable segregation of critical consumers (thrusters 
and transformers) to remove the single card failure mode affecting systems on both sides of the switchboard. 

An independent review of the reconfiguration should be undertaken to ensure that the modification is valid and will not 
bring about other failures that lead to undesired events. 

Protection  systems  should  be  installed  on  the  control  boards  such  that  the  supply  to  the  input  channels  (from  field 
devices) is galvanically isolated from that used within the boards’ processing package.  The protection system should be 
demonstrated prior to acceptance. 

iv)  The segregation of the data input cables from diesel generator protection units to the control systems cards should be 

increased to protect the cards from the possibility of an induced current or voltage.  

v) 

An FMEA should be carried out on the reconfigured vessel management system (power management/integrated control 
systems) and a trials protocol developed to test and validate the FMEA findings.  

vi)  A review of other vessels in the fleet vessel management systems should be undertaken to ensure that similar failure 

mechanisms are not present. 

