AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 18/09 

Safety Flash 

December 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety matters  and incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons learned  from  them.    The information  below has been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fatality During Pressure Test 

A fatal incident has been reported which, while it took place on a drilling rig, is also relevant to many vessel operations. 

During a pressure test with nitrogen, a pressure relief valve in the treating line vented.  The valve was rigged up in a vertical 
position approximately 60cm above the height of the line.  As the valve vented, the assembly rotated through 90 degrees and 
hit the deck of the rig.  During this rotation the assembly struck a crew member on the temple causing a fatal injury. 

Valve equipment that moved following release of high pressure 

 

Following investigation, the following points were noted: 

♦  As the valve vented, the force caused the vertical stack to rotate through 90 degrees until it came into contact with the 

♦  The crew member was in the high pressure area while pressure was being applied in order to check the pressure on an 

deck; 

instrument in the vicinity. 

The following lessons were drawn from the incident: 

♦  There should be an exclusion zone around all high pressure equipment under test.  No personnel should be in this zone 
while  pressure  is  being  applied.    Where  authorised  personnel  do  need  access,  this  should  be  subject  to  further  risk 
assessment and additional controls or barriers put in place.  No further increases in pressure should take place whilst 
personnel are in the high pressure area; 

♦  As  far  as  possible,  instrumentation  in  a  high  pressure  exclusion  zone  should  have  remote  viewing  or  monitoring 

capability in a low-risk area; 

♦  When working near pressurised equipment personnel should keep clear from likely pressure release points and always 

out of the line of fire from vents and relief outlets; 

♦  Equipment that could move in reaction to the sudden escape of gas under high pressure should, as far  as possible,  be 
properly secured, anchored or immobilised.  All fittings and connections on pressure test equipment should be rated for 
the test pressure and adequately secured. 

 

2  Fatal Incident Onboard a Dive Support Vessel 

A member has reported  an incident in which a rigger was fatally injured when  a large  steel frame, known as  a  cursor, fell 
from a height of two metres trapping the rigger and resulting in fatal crush injuries to his chest.  He was declared dead on 
arrival at hospital. 

Work was being conducted onboard a dive support vessel (DSV) to 
modify  the  mode  of  operation  of  the  cursor  to  ‘active  mode’.  An 
‘active cursor’ is a frame that can independently be lowered, attach 
itself  to  the  diving  bell  and  be  used  to  independently  lift  or  lower 
the bell. 

The work involved installation of a new hydraulic winch, structural 
modification and associated pipe-fitting.  The workers involved with 
the modifications were experienced.  

The  cursor  was  suspended  above  the  diving  bell  by  the  newly 
installed  winch  and  it  fell  as  a  result  of  a  failure  of  the  hydraulic 
braking system for that winch.  A rigger was working on top of the 
diving  bell  modifying  some  buoyancy  units  at  the  time  of  the 
accident.    Although  there  were  a  number  of  other  people  in  the 
vicinity and close to the worksite there were no other injuries. 

The  immediate  cause  of  the  winch  failure  was  determined  to  be  a 
faulty pilot valve in the cursor’s winch control system.  A technical 
failure in the pilot valve prevented the automatic brake application 
on the winch. 

Following investigation the company noted the following: 

♦  A  faulty  pilot  valve  in  the  winch  system  failed,  causing  the 
brakes not to be applied in the stop position.  This resulted in 
the  hydraulic  winch  being  unable  to  hold  the  weight  of  the 
cursor, which caused the winch to unwind and drop the cursor; 

Diving bell with cursor above 

 

♦  There was no visual indication at the winch control panel that the brakes had been correctly applied, i.e. there was no 

warning system built into the hydraulic system by the manufacturer; 

♦  Single point failure of this pilot valve had not been identified as a failure mode for the hydraulic system; 
♦  The importance of the commissioning phases and interfaces for the hydraulic system and its control mechanisms were 

not sufficiently identified and were not appropriately managed; 

♦  The control system was not fully commissioned prior to its use; 
♦  The company’s own internal project management systems were not fully utilised; 
♦  Communications and reporting lines within the project team and with offshore and onshore management were neither 

♦  Design intentions and pre-commissioning requirements for safe operation of the new equipment had not been properly 

fully utilised nor understood; 

communicated to the work team; 

♦  There was no secondary means of securing the active cursor; 
♦  A decision was taken to work under the cursor.  The hazard of working under a suspended load was not recognised as it 

was not a ‘typical’ load suspended from a crane. 

The company drew the following lessons from the incident: 

♦  There  should  be  a  clear  and  fully  understood  definition  of  the  statement  of  requirements  when  dealing  with  external 

providers; 

commissioning; 

♦  External  providers  should  provide  clear  pre-commissioning  and  commissioning  guidelines  and  follow  them  during 

♦  Project management for ‘internal’ company projects should be to the same rigorous standard as applied when managing 
client  projects.    In  particular,  personnel  competency  requirements  should  be  rigorously  applied  for  all  project 
management; 

♦  There should be a clear definition and understanding of the responsibilities and reporting lines of those managing such 
work both on and offshore.  Lines of responsibility between vessel-based personnel and shore-based staff should be fully 
agreed and understood prior to commencing the work onboard; 

 

♦  All safety management tools, such as behavioural observations, toolbox talks, risk assessments, time out for safety etc., 

should all be working as planned; 

♦  There should be adequate ownership, supervision and intervention of all ‘projects’ onboard the vessel through onboard 
review meetings and safety intervention tools.  This is particularly important when operating conditions are subject to 
change, as during installation, commissioning, trials and harbour activities; 

♦  Structured review such as failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA)  and both internal company  approval and external 

approval should be obtained before commissioning hydraulic and other complex safety-critical systems; 

♦  The  change  from  commissioning  phase  to  operational  phase  must  be  clearly  defined,  particularly  for  safety  critical 
equipment.    Personnel  should  not  make  assumptions  about  the  integrity  of  equipment  before  it  has  been  formally 
accepted as operational; 

♦  Measures should be in place to identify and mechanically secure suspended loads before passing beneath. 

There  are  clear  lessons  to  be  learnt  relating  to  personnel  competence,  project  management,  communications  and  lines  of 
responsibility,  supervision,  utilisation  of  procedures  and  risk  awareness.    This  incident  highlights  the  importance  of  making 
sure that all the systems and controls in place to act as barriers and prevent an accident should be properly maintained and 
proven to be working at all times. 

The specific barriers that failed to prevent this incident were: 

♦  Project controls – these should be robust and always utilised for internal as well as external projects; 
♦  People selection and development – competence schemes should fully operational and effective; 
♦  Technical integrity – there should be robust design and effective equipment quality control; 
♦  At a practical and basic level the final barrier which should always be in place, and which was not in this case, is: Always 

be aware of the surroundings, look out for ‘non-obvious’ suspended loads; and 

♦  Never work under a suspended load – and challenge others who do! 

3  Lost Time Injury to Leg 

A member has reported an incident in which a sub-contractor’s employee suffered a leg injury which was categorised as a 
lost time injury (LTI).  Whilst working on offloading a vessel, the sub-contract employee’s left leg above the ankle was pinned 
between a shifting spreader bar frame and a freight container located adjacent to the spreader bar frame.  While one of the 
seven  spreader  bars  was  being  lifted  and  in  the  air  the  remaining  bars  shifted,  causing  the  frame  to  slide  approximately 
one metre (40 inches) towards the freight container where the employee was standing.  Hydraulic power packs were used to 
help free the trapped employee, who was taken to the local hospital.  The employee suffered a hairline fracture of the left 
ankle and the incident was categorised as an LTI. 

Injured person’s ankle was trapped between yellow spreader bars and blue freight container 

 

 

Following investigation, the company noted the following: 

♦  The supervisor in charge did not follow in-house job safety analysis procedures; 
♦  The sub-contractor personnel were not required to follow in-house job safety analysis procedures; 
♦  The sub-contractor did not provide the specified fully trained personnel but, rather, a general labourer. 

 

♦ 

The company implemented the following actions to prevent recurrence: 

Installation of clips to secure the load frames to the deck and installed additional safety stops on the load frames to hold 
the spreader bars from moving 

♦  Audit of training records of all sub-contractor personnel in order to ensure that personnel without proven competence 

or proper training were not accepted for work; 

♦  The sub-contractor was asked to provide full training for all contract personnel, which should be: 

♦  Senior leadership would provide clear guidance to supervisory personnel that safety processes and procedures could not 

– 
– 
– 

appropriate to the work being performed 
compliant with local regulatory safety standards 
fully verifiable through testing; 

be cut short. 

4  Loss of ROV:  Dropped Object 

A member has reported an incident in which a remotely controlled vehicle (ROV) and its tether management system (TMS) 
were dropped to the seabed following failure of the umbilical termination.  During recovery of the system, just as the bullet 
was about to enter the docking head in the A-frame, the umbilical separated from the TMS and both the ROV and its TMS 
were dropped to the seabed.  Immediately after the incident occurred, all electrical power to the ROV was switched off and 
high voltage equipment was earthed according to procedure.  The incident occurred three months after the latest umbilical 
re-termination.  

Picture of cast taken after re-termination 

 

 
Two months after the cast was made.   

The strands show signs of being pulled into the 
cone. (Random picture available from system) 

Umbilical termination (cast) 

The surface of the inner cone was corroded and rough, 

although loose rust was removed 

 

An investigation found the following: 

♦  The friction on the inner wall of the bullet was found to be greater than the combined friction of the strands, with the 

result that the cast was not able to be drawn down and wedged properly; 

♦  During  the  investigation  it  also  became  clear  that  the  relevant  checkpoint  in  the  maintenance  programme  was  not 

detailed enough. 

The root causes of the incident were determined to be: 

♦  Friction on the inner wall of the bullet was greater than the combined friction of the strands; 
♦  An important quality control checkpoint lacked clear, and easy to follow, instructions. 

The following corrective actions were made: 

the potting; 

further review and technical analysis; 

♦  A new maintenance checkpoint task was added for inspecting the armour strands for any signs of being pulled through 

♦  Pictures of the cast structure of the company’s entire ROV fleet were initiated immediately following this incident, for 

♦  Further pictures of the cast structure of every ROV system would be taken on a frequent basis; 
♦  All bullets made of carbon steel would be changed out and replaced with a new type of bullet made of stainless steel.  

This would eliminate corrosion and friction to the inner walls of bullet. 

