AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/00 

Safety Flash 

December 2000 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Anchor Handling on Deck 

A member has reported a recent incident on board an anchor handling vessel which resulted in a serious injury to one of the 
deck crew. 

The  cause  of  the  injury  was  whipping  of  a  tugger  wire  that  parted  under  load  whilst  manoeuvring  a  disconnected  anchor 
across the deck.  The anchor was disconnected from the lay barge for wet storage and was being moved to the stern of the 
vessel for over-boarding.  It tipped over the stern roller and broke one of the attached tugger wires (24mm) due to slack in 
the pennant wire allowing excess movement of the anchor. 

The company involved has identified the following as good practice: 

1. 

Include toolbox talks with the crew before the start of a new job.  Implement toolbox talks for any non-routine work.  
Keep minutes of these talks and action list; 

2.  Perform regular checks on all load-bearing apparatus/rigging; 

3.  Always maintain tension on the pennant wire when over boarding anchors over the stern roller; 

4.  Always follow approved procedures when performing operations; 

5.  Be aware of action/position of all crew members and ensure that all personnel are in safe areas and aware of the work  

2  Flat Woven Webbing Slings made from Man-Made Fibre 

We have recently received the attached safety alert from Grampian Test & Certification Ltd. regarding potential problems in 
the manufacture of their slings. 

3  New Concern related to Divex LP Hoses 

We have received the attached Divex Safety Notice regarding further failures of their LP hoses. 

GRAMPIAN TEST & CERTIFICATION LTD

WOODSIDE ROAD, BRIDGE OF DON, ABERDEEN AB23 8EF

CRAWPEEL ROAD, ALTENS, ABERDEEN, AB12 3LG

SAFETY ALERT

Subject

Lifting Equipment Manufacture

Scope

Flat woven webbing slings made from man-made fibre

Purpose

Identification  of  the  potential  problems  in  the  manufacture
of  flat  webbing  slings  produced  by  Grampian  Test  &
Certification Ltd prior to February 2000

Please  inspect  all  flat  webbing  slings,  especially  those  produced  prior  to  February
2000.

A  one  tonne  flat  webbing  sling  made  of  coloured fabric  meant  for  two  tonne  slings,
and  a  twelve  tonne  sling  made  of  fabric  meant  for  eight  tonne  slings  have  been
produced  and  may  still  be  in  circulation.    Both  these  slings  were  manufactured  in
1999, and the colour coding issue has been addressed as of February 2000.

Ensure that all slings are inspected prior to use, and the safe working load identified
via the label on the sling or by the certification.

All  textile  lifting  slings  (round)  and  flat  lifting  slings  (webbing)  that  comply  with  the
parameters  of  the  British  Standards  BS  6668  Part  2:1987  &  BS  3481  Part  2:1983
respectively must comply with the colour code below.

Colour Code of Working Load Limit

Safe Working Load

(tonnes)

1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
8.0

10.0+

Colour

Violet
Green
Yellow
Grey
Red
Brown
Blue

Orange

Working load limits differing from those above can be assigned nominal colours but
they may not use the same colours as already assigned in the British Standards.

Actions

• 

Inspect all slings to ensure that if the British Standards are quoted, they comply
with the colour code above, in particular but not exclusively one and twelve tonne
slings.

•  Return  through  recognised  channels  all  slings  that  fail  to  comply  with  the

standards to Grampian Test & Certification Ltd for replacement as new.

Supporting Documentation

•  BS  3481  Part  2:1983  amendment  number  2  15th  November  1998  (Flat  Lifting

•  BS 6668 Part 2:1987 amendment number 1 15th November 1998 (Textile Lifting

Slings)

Slings)

Please refer all queries with regard to this Safety Alert to: -

Alexander Gowing

Technical Support Manager

Grampian Test & Certification Ltd

DIVEX SAFETY NOTICE

Safety Notice No. DVX003/2000
New Concern related to Divex
L.P.Hoses

  

Divex Ltd.
Enterprise Drive
Westhill, Aberdeen
AB32 6TQ, United Kingdom

Telephone +44 (0)1224 740145
+44 (0)1224 740172
Facsimile 
e-mail 
info@divex.co.uk

Further to our Safety Notice No DVX001/2000 dated 13 June 2000 Divex implemented improved
manufacturing and test procedures to alleviate potential failure of L.P. Hoses in service.

Unfortunately,  we  have  been  made  aware  of  two  failures  of  hoses  that  were  manufactured  in
accordance  with  the  improved  procedure.    Two  hoses,  being  used  at  different  locations,    have
been reported to part from the ferrule at the mask/helmet end of the hose.   The failed hoses had
been fully pressure tested, load tested and certified by Divex.   Despite the above these failures
have occurred and to date we have not established the cause of failure.

In  accordance  with  the  company's  commitment  to  safety  we  are  issuing  this  Safety  Notice
containing  the  following  information  until  such  time  as  an  up-date  can  be  issued  confirming  the
cause of the reported failures.

Please ensure all L.P.Hoses supplied by Divex to your organisation are checked as detailed below
prior to continued use:

1.  With an indelible pen mark the rear of the crimp where it meets the hose at both ends (this

may require the hose protector to be pulled back).

2.  With the hose fully screwed into the first stage regulator and the other end mated to a suitable
fitting apply a load of 20 KGs to the hose assembly for one minute minimum  -  see  attached
sketch.

3.  Remove  the  load  from  the  hose  assembly  and  check  to  ensure  that  the  indelible  pen  marks

have not moved from their original position.

4.  Hoses that show no signs of movement can continue in service and the indelible mark may be

used as an ongoing check/ confirmation of no movement of hose.

5.  Any hose that shows signs of movement must be withdrawn from use and returned to Divex

immediately.

6.  Mark the returned hoses for the attention of Kathleen Scanlan

Divex apologise for the inconvenience caused to our valued customers by this problem but believe
this is the only course of action until we have established the cause of failure.   Once established
we will immediately issue a further statement.

SIGNED ______________________________________________   DATED:  8 December 2000

G.Gilbert, Senior Manager, Safety and Personnel

Attached: 

 

Sketch 

No 

DVX003/2000

