AB(cid:31)

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/08 

Safety Flash

April 2008 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fatal  Accident  in  Connection  with  the  Operation  of  an  A-frame  based  Launch  and  Recovery 

System (LARS) used for ROV Operations 

1.1  The Incident 

During the process of docking in a floating dock, an ROV 
crew consisting of seven persons was working on an ROV 
spread  inside  the  hangar  on  the  port  side  of  the  vessel.  
This work was mainly to undock the ROV from the tether 
management  system  (TMS)  unit  and  to  cut  out  and 
re-terminate  a  50-70m  section  of  the  umbilical  on  the 
ROV winch. 

Prior  to  the  incident,  the  ROV  had  been  separated  from 
the TMS and both units were resting on the base platform 
in  the  hangar,  with  the  TMS  located  just  underneath  the 
docking  head  which  was  situated  2.5m  above  the  top  of 
the  TMS.    The  ROV  was  located  adjacent  to  the  TMS 
towards the port side of the 

hangar. 

A total power black out occurred onboard the vessel due 
to lack of cooling water supply to the auxiliary engines.  At 
this  time  the  TMS  unit  made  a  sudden  and  significant 
vertical upward movement (of approximately 2.5m) until it 
was  stopped  by  the  docking  head  overhead.    The  ROV 
senior supervisor was standing on top of the TMS with the 
aim of assisting with the pull-out of the umbilical.  He was 
thus trapped between the TMS and the docking head and 
subjected to a massive force of 13.7 tonnes, resulting in his 
death. 

At  the  time  of  the  accident,  the  ROV  supervisor  was 
standing  on  a small  service  platform  on the  side of the  TMS  facing  the accommodation  and he was thrown  clear, 
landing on the base platform, with no apparent injuries. 

The other ROV crew members were located in the following positions: 

♦  One  person  was  strategically  located  between  the  ROV/TMS  and  the  accommodation  operating  the  remote 

control for the LARS system, 

♦  One  person  was  located  on  the  ROV  winch  deck  on  top  of  the  ROV  hangar,  adjusting  the  position  of  the 

transversal crane to keep it well clear of the LARS system, 

♦  Two persons were located on the inboard side of the TMS, pulling out slack on the umbilical from the umbilical 

winch, 

♦  One ROV trainee was observing the operation from a safe position near the centre of the hangar. 

The accident was sudden and the witnesses of the tragedy estimated the time it took for the uncontrolled and rapid 
spooling of the winch to be in the order of 2-3 seconds. 

 

1.2  Facts and Observations from the Investigation 

There was no offshore manager (OM) assigned onboard after the vessel’s departure from its last port. 

The ROV crew had allegedly obtained, from the bridge, permission to work at heights. 

There  were  no  indications  that  the  ROV  crew  members  were  not  wearing  the  correct  PPE  for  this  type  of 
operation. 

The ROV crew was working on the ROV spread during the de-ballasting of the floating dock. 

Relevant crew allegedly knew that a power black out would take place during the dry docking process, although the 
exact  timing  of  this  black  out  and  the  permanent  loss  of  440  VAC  was  not  known  to  some  key  personnel 
beforehand. 

The accident occurred at the same time as the power black out.  The ROV winch spooled in the umbilical instantly 
and in an uncontrolled manner, lifting the TMS module vertically up towards the docking head, causing the fatality. 

The ROV supervisor was standing on top of the TMS with the aim of assisting the pull-out of the umbilical of which 
about 5m had been slacked off when the incident occurred.  He was trapped and his body subjected to a massive 
force of 13.7 tonnes between the TMS and the docking head. 

Due to power cut the operation of the emergency stop had no effect. 

It is  anticipated  that the task  of  spooling off  (approximately  50m)  of  umbilical in  order  to  re-terminate  had  to be 
completed prior to docking – this may have led to time pressure. 

It has been noted that assistant ROV supervisor was in process of lashing down the TMS at the time of the incident. 

1.3  Technical Errors 

Testing and trouble shooting have confirmed that there were serious technical discrepancies on the LARS system 
resulting in a chain of events having a direct effect on the accident. 

The mechanisms with effect, cause and corrective measures are presented below.  It was noted that all of the six 
mechanisms described below had to occur simultaneously for the erratic winch behaviour to occur. 

1.3.1  The isolation valve fails to close: 

♦  The motor remains open to hydraulic power. 

♦ 

Incorrect wiring. 

Corrective measure: 

Effect: 

Cause: 

 Effect: 

Cause: 

♦  Wiring done according to original drawing; 

♦  The valve is hardwired into the emergency stop circuit (de-energising). 

1.3.2  The bypass valve fails to open: 

♦  Potentially full pressure differential over the motor with failure on the isolation valve, thus enabling the 

motor to produce maximum torque. 

♦  An  error  in  the  motor  controller  (HNC)  software  fails  to  de-energise  the  bypass  valve  when  an 

emergency stop is triggered, while operating the winch from the radio remote or the operator panel. 

 

Corrective measure: 

♦  Software for motor controller updated.  Bypass valve will be de-energised as originally intended when 

the winch is rotating during an emergency stop. 

1.3.3  The brake fails to engage within reasonable time: 

♦  The brake cannot stop winch motion within reasonable time. 

 Effect: 

Cause: 

Effect: 

Cause: 

Effect: 

Cause: 

♦  The main controller (PC104) software will not engage the brake until a brake engage request is given 
from  the  motor  controller  (HNC)  software.    The  motor  controller  software  will  not  give  such  a 
request in all situations. 

Corrective measure: 

♦  Software  for  motor  controller  updated.    Brake  on  command  (de-energising)  will  be  provided 

immediately in case of an emergency stop; 

♦  Software  for  main  controller  updated.    Brake  on  command  (de-energising)  will  be  provided 

immediately in case of an emergency stop, independent of the motor controller; 

♦  Brake control is hardwired into the emergency stop circuit (de-energising). 

1.3.4  The displacement (swivel angle) of the motor is sufficient to create winch pull: 

♦  The motors had a displacement creating torque so that the winch could pull in. 

♦  To avoid the load from dropping during a normal emergency stop, the displacement of the motors is 
set at a fixed value.  As long as the isolation valve is closed as it should be in case of an emergency 
stop, the winch can only give a static torque and cannot hoist any load as the supply of high pressure 
oil  is  cut  by  the  isolation  valve.    When  the  bypass  valve  opens,  there  will  be  no  significant  pressure 
differential over the motor and the winch’s ability to also create a static torque will be lost. 

Corrective measure: 

♦  None.    Displacement  is  required  to  prevent  the  load  from  dropping  during  an  ordinary  emergency 
stop.    Investigations  regarding  alternatives  ongoing.    This  is  to  be  tested  at  the  implementation  of  a 
coming release of new motor controller software. 

1.3.5  The winch has a speed signal different from the control signal for zero: 

♦  Winch hoisting for a longer period of time after an emergency stop. 

♦ 

In  the  original  motor  controller  software,  the  brake  did  apply  quickly  at  an  emergency  stop  at  zero 
speed, but not when the speed was different than zero. 

Corrective measure: 

♦  As for 1.3.3. 

1.3.6  Hydraulic power is available: 

 Effect: 

♦  Winch motion possible. 

 

Cause: 

♦  Pumps do not instantly stop rotating, due to rotation inertia; 

♦  Hydraulic energy is stored in accumulators; 

♦  Hydraulic energy is stored in the system due to the flexibility of pipes, hoses and the oil itself. 

Corrective measure: 

♦  A  valve  on  the  accumulator  will  be  installed  to  cut  the  connection  to  the  main  line,  and  relieve  the 
energy  into  the  return  line.    The  valve  will  be  hardwired  into  the  emergency  stop  circuit  (de-
energising). 

The following summarises the applied measures: 

♦  Wiring of isolation valve corrected to comply with original drawing; 

♦ 

Isolation valves hardwired into the emergency stop circuit; 

♦  Brake control valve hardwired into the emergency stop circuit; 

♦  Main controller software updated to request brake on upon an emergency stop; 

♦  Motor controller software updated to request brake on upon an emergency stop; 

♦  Motor controller software updated to de-energise bypass valve upon an emergency stop; 

The applied measures of the introduction of modifications to the software and electronic hardware will minimise the 
probability of any failure to engage the brake, or failure to close the isolation valve, during an emergency stop.  The 
duration of any significant dynamic winch pull will also be minimised as the bypass valve short-circuits the hydraulic 
motor shortly after an emergency stop. 

Further, the following measure will be applied at a later stage due to lead time of components: 

♦  The accumulator will be cut off from the main line, and the stored high pressure oil will be discharged to tank 

through a hydraulic valve being hardwired into the emergency stop circuit. 

The combination of technical and human error had resulted in an unfortunate breach of barriers causing the fatality.  
Apart from the technical issues identified, there were several examples of human error including: 

1.4  Company’s Conclusion 

♦  Management/supervision; 

♦  Communication; 

♦  Culture; 

♦  Compliance; 

♦  Task planning; 

♦  Barriers. 

These issues are to be focused on by the company. 

