AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/13 

Safety Flash 

May 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Near Miss: Failure of Gas Quad Fitting 

A member has reported an incident in which there was a potentially catastrophic failure of a high pressure fitting on a gas 
quad.  The incident occurred in a yard ashore when crew were carrying out pre-mobilisation equalisation transfer between 
banks on mixed gas DIV64 quad pack using high pressure (HP) hose.  The wrong fitting (incorrect thread and low pressure 
(LP) rather than HP) was used to connect the HP whip to the king valve on the quad.  The fitting failed due to a hairline crack 
as the gas transfer was being conducted between the HP banks. 

The LP fitting failed such that it split into two pieces.  One piece was found in the immediate vicinity; the other was found 
20m away from the point of failure.  It was later discovered that this piece had travelled with such force that it had hit and 
chipped an internal brick wall within a nearby workshop.  The trajectory of this second piece would have crossed the main 
general workshop area in the facility at a height of approximately 3 metres where an estimated 10 other persons had been 
working.  There were no injuries. 

Part of failed fitting 

Hose damage resulting from inadequate whip check 

 

 

The company concerned noted that the following safety precautions were in place: 

¤  A risk assessment on the immediate work area had been carried out prior to starting work; 

¤  A permit to work had been completed, signed and displayed by the operator and immediate supervisor; 

¤  Adequate bunting and warning signage had been erected to alert surrounding work areas of HP activities; 

¤  The worker conducting the task had reviewed and signed a job hazard analysis for high pressure filling. 

During investigation, the following points were noted: 

¤ 

In order to complete this task in equalising gas between the mixed gas  DIV64 internal  banks, use was  made of  NPTT 
(tapered) adapter fittings from both the HP king valve stem connection ports and adapting to the HP transfer hose, and  
in this incident both the thread type and the choice of material were incorrect.  Low pressure fittings were used rather 
than high pressure fittings; 

 
¤  Whip checks had been installed at each end of the transfer hose and secured to the DIV64 frame prior to equalisation 
operations being conducted. However, the hose end at the point of failure did not adequately choke or restrict the hose 
to a point where by it should have prevented the uncontrolled movement.  This resulted in the hose also being damaged 
and ripped at the section where the stainless steel hose crimp is machine fitted (see photo); 

¤  An identical ¼” NPTP brass socket fitting arrangement had been used on the other end of the hose; upon inspection, a 

hair-line crack was found in the material; 

¤  Additionally the first section of the brass fitting had clear visual evidence of heavy condensation, and icing on the exterior 
of  the  other  associated  adapter  fittings  at  the  point  of  the  pressure  drop  which  would  have  further  contributed  to 
reducing the structural integrity of material under high pressure. 

It was also noted that there was no specific process or procedure in place for the task, and that the time allowed for the task 
was not sufficient. 

The following root causes were identified: 

¤  Pressure of circuit was above the coupler’s capacity; 

¤  Crimped swivel fittings not suited to pressure of this level; 

¤  Crew were not aware of different thread types;  

¤  Whip checks insufficient; 

¤  Valves open more then they needed to be; 

¤  Regulator not used; 

¤  Pressure not monitored; 

¤  Over-tightening on coupler resulted in hairline stress cracks. 

The following lessons were learnt: 

¤  Equipment should be of sufficient pressure rating; 

¤ 

Improved training and information were required on this task; 

¤  Risk assessment for this task needed to be more detailed; 

¤  Hose securing – whip checks – should be improved; 

¤  Consider increasing size of restricted access area during high pressure work;  

¤  Real-time measurement of high pressure should be in place; 

¤  Time allowed for this work should be realistic; 

¤  Complacency is to be guarded against.  

2  LTI: Fall from Height 

A member has reported an incident in which a crewman suffered an injury during a fall from height.  The incident occurred 
when a senior ROV pilot technician was climbing down from the ROV hydraulic power unit (HPU) after cleaning the unit 
with another crewman acting as spotter and assistant.  When making his final step down from the HPU, the injured person’s 
full body harness safety lanyard caught on one of the rigging points.  As the lanyard hung up, it prevented him from touching 
the  deck  with  his  final  step  from  the  HPU,  causing  him  to  swing  into  and  make  forceful  contact  with  the  LARS  stowed 
transport post.  The post protruded approximately 5 inches and is approximately 4 feet off the deck.  He hit the post in the 
lower right back just below his right shoulder blade. 

During the injured person’s descent, the other crewman had left the area to stow tools. He heard a loud bang and a scream.  
When he arrived back at the scene, he noted his colleague was suspended approximately one inch off of the deck, with toes 
just touching the deck.  He helped him to the deck, and called the medic.  

The injured person was taken to local medical facilities where he was diagnosed with rib contusion and given prescription 
drugs for pain.  At a follow-up examination some days later the injured person’s duty status was changed to restricted duty 
with no bending, no climbing and no lifting of more than 5 kg.  A further medical appointment was scheduled.  Four days of 
lost time were incurred. 

 
The company’s investigation revealed the following: 

¤  Failure to follow the job safety analysis that had been established and reviewed prior to work starting; 

– 
– 

the JSA identified that a ladder should be used, however this ladder was not used for either ascent or descent 
the spotter was to remain in the work area during the performance of all tasks, but left to store tools during his 
colleague’s descent from height; 

¤  Rushing  to  complete  the  job  without  consideration  of  hazards  which  included:  the  injured  person  failing  to  check  all 
conditions before descent from the HPU, and the spotter leaving area to store tools before his colleague was safely on 
deck. 

The  company  noted  that  risk  assessments  and  job  safety  analyses  are  generated  and  reviewed  for  employees’  safety,  and 
should  be  read,  understood  and  followed,  otherwise  employees  and  their  colleagues  can  be  placed  at  risk.    The  following 
lessons were learnt: 

¤  Failure to understand and fulfil assigned safety responsibilities places everyone in danger.  Spotters and observers must 

recognise the importance of their roles and remain vigilant when monitoring work activities; 

¤  Rushing to complete tasks could have serious long-term consequences, as short cuts may be taken which could result in 
accidents.  No job is more important than the people who perform it.  Work carefully and deliberately and give yourself 
time to think about potential hazards and doing the job right.  Always put safety first. 

3  LTI: Serious Foot Injury 

A member has reported an incident in which a rope access technician suffered a serious injury to one of his toes, leading to 
partial amputation.  During J-lay pipeline operations, a malfunction was discovered in the locking pin designed to lock off the 
hang-off clamp (HOC).  The pin would move down, but not up.  Maintenance of the equipment was arranged.  A crewman 
was assigned to clean the hang-off clamp using a water jet, and during this process he was supervised, from the deck level, by 
the Chief Engineer and 1st Engineer.  When the cleaning was complete, he confirmed using hand signals to his supervisors 
that the job was complete. 

The supervising team alerted the crewman that there would shortly be a test movement of the locking pin in order to test 
the functionality of the equipment.  The supervising team alerted the crewman of the imminent movement of the pin, giving 
signals  that  he  should  move  to  a  safer  location.    He  confirmed  visually  that  he  had  received  this  signal,  but  did  not  move, 
remaining  with  his  foot  on  the  pin.    The  1st  Engineer  gave  instructions  via  radio  that  the  pin  should  be  moved.    Whilst 
moving, the pin squeezed the toe cap of the crewman’s boot, causing injuries leading to partial amputation of his right big toe. 

HOC’s locking pin 

 

 

Showing hang-off clamp locking pin 

 

 

Line drawing showing place of incident and position of persons involved 

 

An investigation identified the following causes: 

¤ 

Improper communication between all persons involved: 
– 

injured person and supervisory team communicated using hand and visual signals and there was no confirmation that 
the signals were understood as intended 
1st Engineer and control room operator communicated by radio 

– 
–  There was no communication between injured person and control room operator; 

¤  The control room operator could see the hang-off clamp, but could not see personnel working nearby; 

¤  There was no evidence of any toolbox talk before the operation to agree on proper communication channels or planning 

of the operation; 

¤  Whilst a job safety analysis and permit to work had been issued, these did not fully identify the task hazards. 

The following corrective actions were taken: 

¤ 

¤ 

Improved job safety analysis to ensure adequate identification of all hazards and mitigation measures; 

Improved communication protocols and instituted use of common communications channel between crew and control 
room. 

4  Gangway Safety: A Review of Recent Incidents and Near Misses Involving Vessel Gangways 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash reviewing a number of incidents and near misses reported 
by base staff involving vessel gangways.  These incidents and near misses range from improperly rigged gangways and safety 
nets through to poor housekeeping standards with tripping hazards left on the gangway  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.09.pdf  

 
5  Dropped Object Injury 

The Marine Safety Forum has published the following safety flash covering an incident in which a crew member was injured 
when  a  trolley  and  chain  hoist  came  off  the  lifting  beam.    The  immediate  cause  of  the  incident  was  that  in  certain 
circumstances there was no end stopper to prevent the trolley and chain host from coming off the end of the beam. 

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.10.pdf  

6  Risks Associated with Pneumatic Hose Couplings 

The National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority of Australia (NOPSEMA) has published 
the following safety alert covering the risks of incorrectly assembled or faulty pressurised pneumatic (air) hose couplings.  

The alert can be downloaded from www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/publications/Safety-Alert-55.pdf  

