AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 09/03 

August 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Use of Rags – Potential Puncture Wound 

Keywords: Near miss 

We have received the following report of a near-miss on board a rig, which provides a reminder of the need for constant 
safety awareness offshore. 

A coil tubing supervisor was involved in the process of rigging up equipment on the rig floor.  As he was sweating, he went to 
a rag box and selected an unused rag to wipe his forehead with.  After wiping the sweat from his forehead, he noticed a 1” 
sewing pin that had been left in the rag. 

No injury occurred.  However, there was considerable potential for a puncture wound to his hands or face. 

The rags came from a chain of suppliers and the rag source was variable. 

The company involved has noted that boxes of rags are a widely-used commodity within the industry and that they may not 
be free from contamination or sharp objects.  It is possible that rags may be used to soak up contaminant and then returned 
to the box. 
 

While  there  are  certain  checks  within  the  rag  supply  process,  it  is  also  important  that  a  user  checks  the  rag  before  use.  
Everyone should be alert to the possibility of contaminants or sharp objects within rag boxes.  As a precaution, the company 
has stated that rags should not be used to wipe faces. 

2  Working with Hoses and Pressure 

Keyword:  Pressure 

Working with pressure and hoses carries several risks that can lead to severe injury.  The identification of the risks involved 
with pressure and hoses can often be missed.  Lately in the oil industry there have been several such incidents, including two 
noted below: 

2.1  Leaking Seal on Hydraulic System causes Oil Spray 

One member has reported an incident which occurred recently, whereby a person got sprayed with hydraulic oil 
due to a leaking seal in the hydraulic system. 

The oil got into his eyes, but he did not take enough time to remove all the oil from his eyes, resulting in a visit to 
the hospital for check-up on shore. 

The lessons learnt were: 

 

 

that  during  pressuring  or  re-pressuring  any  system,  personnel  should  stay  at  a  safe  distance  at  all  times, 
particularly at sensitive connections (flanges, valves, repaired areas etc.); 

the need for personnel to check the relevant data sheet, which should be readily available, for correct action for 
the oil/chemical; 

 

the need to wash eyes or any other body parts extensively if exposed to oils or chemicals; 

 

 

that the effects of oils/chemicals may not apparent immediately, but may occur much later, so it is prudent to 
take immediate defensive action.  

2.2  Fatality While Inflating Truck Tyre 

A heavy-duty truck driver/operator was fatally injured while inflating the truck’s right front tyre.  During inflation, 
the wheel lock ring flew off, hitting the operator in the face.  The company involved has noted the need to maintain 
a safe position while carrying out such work, as illustrated in the diagrams below: 

X 

One  member  has  passed  IMCA  its  notes  to  employees  on  the  subject  of  working  with  hoses  and  pressure  as 
follows: 

Take a moment to review the following points to help prevent any further hose related incidents. 

 

 

Risks when working with or around hoses and pressure: 

  Whip from hose resulting from 

–  A sudden release due to connection failure 
–  Disconnecting a pressurised hose 
– 
– 
– 

Failure to use proper hose safety locks and restraints 
Sudden release due to improper fastening of connection 
Failure as a result of exceeding pressure capacity of hose 

  Hose fatigue and exposure to hazardous environment 

  Hose/connection manufacturing defect 

  Pressure injection injuries 

To prevent accidents and damage to hoses: 

  Wear appropriate PPE including, hardhat, safety glasses, gloves while working with hoses. 

  Use hose safety devices including pins. 

  Use the corrective length and diameter of hose. 

  Run the hose as specified by the manufacturer, ensuring proper support and restraint brackets. 

  Replace any chafing guards that are damaged or missing. 

  Do not ignore outer jacket damage.  Replace hose as necessary. 

  Check fittings ensuring they are in good working condition. 

  Keep all air and high-pressure hoses properly coiled when not in use. 

  See that couplings and valves are in good repair.  Make sure ends cannot be pulled loose allowing the lines to 

whip around dangerously. 

 

  High-pressure  wash  guns  without  trigger  shut-off  valves  should  not  be  used.    Never  point  any  high-pressure 

  Compressed air blow-off guns can be dangerous.  Keep gun directed away from face and use goggles to protect 

spray wand at another person. 

your eyes from flying dust particles. 

  When  working  around  steam  cleaning  operations  always  wear  boots,  heavy  gloves  and  face  protection  to 
protect from burns.  A shot of steam inside a pair of shoes can raise blisters.  Hands that touch a hot coupling 
can result in painful burns. 

Pressurised equipment is a potential hazard to be approached with care 

3  Slips, Trips and Falls resulting from Loose Cables and Hoses on Walkways 

Keyword: Fall 

A member has recently issued advice to its employees concerning slips, trips and falls.  It notes that international review of 
incidents reveals that a substantial percentage of incidents are caused by slips (wet surfaces etc), trips (tripping over objects) 
and falls (from heights or otherwise). 

One of the main obstacles on board vessels (also at shipyards and shore bases) is loose cables or hoses, etc., lying on deck or 
other areas. 

There was a recent near-miss where a set of gas hoses together with welding cables were cut/damaged, causing a small fire. 

The company has noted the following lessons learned: 

  Gas and oxygen hoses and electric cables should be kept apart; 

  Cable and hose ‘housekeeping’ should be maintained at all times, with proper maintenance to be carried out on all hoses 

  Hoses and cables should be kept off of the deck/floor through the use of hooks or other means where possible (if this 

impossible, proper protection, such as thresholds, etc., should be used); 

  Tools made available to keep cables and hoses free from the deck/floor should be used and supervisors should check this 

and cables; 

regularly; 

4  Respiratory Equipment 

Keyword: Mask 

A member has recently issued advice to its employees concerning respiratory equipment as follows. 

On board there are several kinds of equipment for protection from possible polluted air.  To be effective, it is necessary to 
assess which kind of mask is appropriate and whether the mask fits correctly, Maintenance of the mask is important. 

Masks are available in several different forms but the common ones are: 

Disposable Masks 

Half Masks 

This filtering mask covers the mouth and nose and removes respirable dust.  They offer protection against some vapours and 
gases.  One type, the 3M8210 gives protection against respirable dust so can be used during grinding, cleaning, jobs.  For arc 
welding/gouging the 3M9925 type also gives protection against the harmful welding fumes. 

Are made of plastic/rubber and are fitted with filter cartridges which can be changed out.  These can be used for vapours, 
gases and dust, but it is very important that the correct filter is used (a dust filter will not filter vapours). 

Do a fit test of the mask before you start working.  A simple test to see whether the fit is tight or not is to close off the air 
supply (filter cartridge holes), breath in and hold your breath.  The respirator should collapse on the face. It should then be 
possible to check to see if there is a leak. 

Similar to the half mask but also covers the eyes by means of a visor. 

A battery operated fan delivers air through a filter to the face mask, helmet or visor. 

For all masks, the following applies – when it is getting hard to breathe, when taste or smell is detected, get out of 
the area where you are working and change the mask or replace the cartridge. 

 

Full Face Mask 

Powered Respirator 

5  Machine Guarding 

Keyword: Machinery 

Employee exposure to unguarded or inadequately guarded machines is prevalent in many workplaces.  Amputations are one 
of the most severe and crippling types of injuries in the occupational workplace. 

All personnel have to be focused on recognising and controlling common amputation hazards associated with the operation 
and use of certain types of machines. 

A member has recently issued advice to its employees as follows: 

All machines consist of three fundamental areas: 

  The point of operation 

  The power transmission device 

  The operating controls 

Despite  all  machines  having  the  same  basic  components,  their  safeguarding  needs  differ  widely  due  to  varying  physical 
characteristics and operator involvement. 

  Safeguards are essential for protecting workers from these needless and preventable injuries 

  Any machine part, function, or process which may cause injury must be safeguarded 

  When  the  operation  of  a  machine  or  accidental  contact  with  it  can  injure  the  operator  or  others  in  the  vicinity,  the 

hazards must be either eliminated or controlled. 

In-running nip points 

Nip  points  can  occur  between  rotating  and 
fixed parts which create a shearing, crushing, or 
abrading action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hazards  are  caused  by  the  rotating  parts  on 
machinery.  Parts  can  rotate 
in  opposite 
directions  while  their  axes  are  parallel  to  each 
other. 
 
 
 
 
Are  also  created  between  rotating  and 
tangentially moving parts. 

 

 

 

 

Rotating Motion 

Can be dangerous; even smooth slowly rotating 
shafts  can  grip  hair  and  clothing,  and  through 
minor  contact  force  the  hand  and  arm  into  a 
dangerous position. 

Reciprocating Motions 

May be hazardous because, during the back and 
forth or up-and-down motion, a worker may be 
struck  by  or  caught  between  a  moving  and  a 
stationary part. 

Transverse Motion 

in  straight,  continuous 

By  movement 
line, 
creates  a  hazard  because  a  worker  may  be 
struck  or  caught  in  a  pinch  or  shear  point  by 
the moving part. 

Cutting Action 

The danger of cutting action exists at the point 
of  operation  where  finger,  arm  and  body 
injuries  can  occur  and  where  flying  chips  or 
scrap  material  can  strike  the  head,  particularly 
the eyes or face. 

 

 

 

 

 

6  Dangers when Mooring and Unmooring 

Keyword: Mooring 

A recent near-miss was reported on a member’s vessel, whereby a rigger was nearly hit by a mooring line during a mooring 
operation.  The rigger was operating the capstan when it happened.  In the past, a number of near misses have occurred and 
unfortunately also a number of very serious accidents whereby people sustained extensive injuries. 

Mooring  and  unmooring  of  barges  and  ships  has  always  been  a  hazardous  operation.    Clearly,  not  all  parts  of  a  mooring 
operation can be planned without good co-operation and communication with the crew of the facility or other vessel. 

To  enhance  such  co-operation  and  communication,  with  the  aim  of  eliminating  such  incidents,  the  member  has  noted  the 
following points in its procedures: 

  Always have a ‘toolbox talk’ prior to any mooring/unmooring operation and keep to the agreements made; 

 

  Follow the correct (agreed) sequence; 

  Always stand clear of areas where you can be hit by a breaking line or a jumping line; 

  Check the condition of the mooring lines before use –if their condition is unacceptable, scrap them; 

 

If you end up in a situation where the situation is hazardous, stand back and/or stop the operation and make sure it is 
safe before proceeding; 

  Communication  between  deck  and  foreman  on  barge  needs  to  be  operating  properly  in  case  of  sequence  changes  or 

otherwise. 

7  Electrical Safety 

Keyword: Power 

Essentially: 

It has been reported to IMCA that there have been several incidents lately relating to electrical safety.  

  Working on electrical equipment can be a highly hazardous job 

  The identification of the risks involved can be hidden and taken for granted. 

Risks associated with working on energised equipment include: 

  Electrical shock/electrocution to personnel 

  Electrical arcing or flash burns 

  Electrical fires 

To  prevent  electrical  injuries  while  working  with  electrical  equipment,  ensuring  the  following  safety  work  practices  are 
followed: 

  Ensure all applicable ‘permits to work’ and stored energy lock-out/tag-out steps are taken; 

  Prior  to  performing  any  work  a  job  safety  assessment/toolbox  talk  must  be  performed  to  determine  the  appropriate 

safeguards and personal protective equipment. 

8  Care Using Hand Tools 

Keyword: Hand Tools 

A  recent  incident  has  been  reported  to  IMCA.    Whilst  we  do  not  have  details  of  injuries  or  damage,  it  involved  a  fairly 
standard operation in the engine room.  An engineer was busy drilling holes in a pumping casing, using a high-powered drill 
machine, which he was using a rope to suspend and then holding by himself. 

 

 

Safety Flash 

 

Causes given in the incident report were: 

  A drill too powerful to be operated by a single person 

  Limited space to operate 

  Poor communication between engineer and his helper 

Corrective action prescribed by the company to all of its vessels is: 

  Heavy hand tools to be operated by at least two operators or other measures to be taken to make their use safer 

  Choose the type of tool to match the job that needs to be done 

 

If necessary carry out a job safety analysis and do a toolbox talk before starting a job. 

