AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/13 

Safety Flash 

 April 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Crew Transfer Vessel Trapped Under a Boat Landing 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  crew  transfer  vessel  became  trapped  when  the  bottom  section  of  a  boat 
landing  fixed  to  an  offshore  accommodation  vessel  gave  way.  The  master  of  the  crew  transfer  vessel  was  not  able  to 
manoeuvre  the  vessel  free  under  own  power,  and  the  vessel  was  eventually  pulled  clear  by  another  crew  transfer  vessel. 
Some of the passengers launched liferafts and abandoned ship without any obvious instructions from the crew of the transfer 
vessel. Personnel were in a liferaft adjacent to the vessel when it was pulled clear and could have been run down. One liferaft 
was  launched  incorrectly  and  did  not  inflate.  The  boat  landing  was  damaged,  and  there  was  minor  damage  inflicted  to  the 
bow of the crew transfer vessel. One member of the transfer vessel crew suffered minor bruising.    

Figure:  Crew transfer vessel shown trapped 

 

During the investigation a number of immediate causes were noted, including: 

♦  Defects or failures in design of equipment (the boat landing and the bow of the crew transfer vessel); 

♦ 

Inadequate risk assessment or consideration of the deteriorating weather and sea state; 

♦  Unexpected relative motion between the crew transfer vessel and the accommodation vessel; 

♦  The trim and draft of the accommodation vessel. 

The underlying causes were found to be: 

♦ 

Inadequate structural integrity of the boat landing - inadequate design; 

♦  Existing work procedures not adequate to the work in hand;    

 

 
♦  The bow height of the crew transfer vessel; 

♦ 

Inadequate communication. 

Actions identified included the following: 

♦  Repair, redesign and subsequent extension of boat landing system; 

♦  Use of fall arrest equipment when transferring from crew transfer boat to accommodation vessel; 

♦  Ensure life-rafts are properly attached to vessels; 

♦  Development of more adequate procedures and detailed risk assessment for this method of crew transfer. 

2  Loss of ROV after Umbilical Termination Failure and Damage to ROV During Recovery 

A member has reported an incident in which there was an ROV umbilical termination failure, loss of ROV and subsequent 
damage to the ROV during emergency recovery from the seabed. The ROV and its TMS were lost during launch of the ROV 
when the umbilical detached from the TMS bullet.  

Umbilical Termination Failure and Loss of ROV 

The launch operation was supported by 3 ROV technicians, one operating the winch from a remote controller and another 
the handling platform using manual hydraulic valve handles. The third person (the ROV supervisor) monitored the operation 
from the ROV control room. To be able to unlatch and disengage from the docking head, the operator needed to lift weight 
off  the  docking  head  latches.  This  was  qualified  visually  by  the  operators.  Once  the  bullet  was  lifted  off  and  latches 
disengaged,  the  umbilical  became  detached  from  the  TMS  bullet.  The  ROV  and  TMS  descended  to  the  seabed  and  landed 
sideways at 298 meters water depth in soft sediments.  

Emergency Recovery 

Another  vessel  was  able  to  assist  in  the  recovery  of  the  ROV.  The  ROV  was  inspected  on  the  seabed  and  based  on  that 
information and the sea conditions (3m significant wave height), a risk assessment and toolbox talk was carried out between 
the two vessels, and recovery was considered safe and possible. A soft sling was used and attached into the bullet. The sling 
was routed through the legs in the bullet, and doubled back. The TMS and ROV were then recovered to deck. After breaking 
the splash zone it was discovered that the “tools” were loosened from the manipulator. When landing on the seabed, the 
front  of  the  ROV  frame  was  on  top  of  the  “tools”.  The  crane  driver  held  the  ROV  with  2  T  tension  while  a  tag  line  was 
attached to the “tools”. When lifting off again, approximately 1 metre, the soft sling snapped. The ROV frame collapsed from 
the weight of the TMS (2.9 tons). There were no injuries to personnel but the ROV, TMS and umbilical were damaged.  

   

 

Figures: (Left) ROV on the seabed  (Right) Parted umbilical 

Umbilical Termination Failure 

Our member had the parted umbilical analysed by a third-party consultant, who drew the following conclusions: 

♦  Three main factors combined to cause the umbilical to fail; 

♦  The overall effect of these factors was a failure to wedge the potting properly into the bullet;  

If one or more of the below factors had not occurred the break point would more likely to have been above the bullet; 

 
♦ 

♦  The factors were: 

1.  The lack of seating was hindered by the rough internal surface of the bullet. The cast had not been seated properly 
in the socket cone, limiting the strength of the termination to the cohesion/friction between the steel wires and the 
cast; 

2.  The reported use of a booster pack, at temperatures higher than recommended, dramatically shortened the curing 
time,  causing  the  wirelock  to  gel  rapidly.  It  is  not  known  whether  or  not  this  caused  the  insufficient  filling  at  the 
bottom part of the socket, but considered as likely. The use of a booster pack at temperatures above 9°C is not in 
accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations and is strongly advised against.   

3.  Un-axial  loads  were  imposed  on  the termination  occurred,  which  caused  snagging.  This  was  confirmed  by  several 
witnesses onboard. This is a result of the design of the bullet/socket allowing the bullet/socket to catch/stop when 
entering the docking head receptacle. Un-axial loads are likely to have been a contributory factor. It was reported 
by the crew that the socket occasionally got caught on the edge of the receptacle of the snubber. Normally such a 
scenario  would  be  more  likely  to  cause  overload  of  the  wires  than  snagging  should  the  termination  have  been 
arranged correctly. If, as argued above, the socket was not properly seated or if sufficient filling was not achieved at 
the  bottom  of  the  cone,  un-axial  loading  is  likely  to  have  instigated  the  failure.  Un-axial  loading  is  a  possible 
explanation for the fact that the termination failed at a significantly lower load than the load test. Snagging may have 
broken the bonding between the cast and the steel wires and the wires could have worked themselves out of the 
cast over time until the length of wires remaining in the cast were insufficient to support the weight of the ROV and 
TMS. 

Illustration of un-axial load on cable from edge of socket getting caught on snubber 

 

 

Emergency Recovery 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  Sharp edges on the bullet cut through the soft-sling and caused the ROV and TMS to drop to the deck during landing; 

♦  The  edge  inside  the  bullet  grade  was  sharp  and  not  polished.  An  emergency  recovery  strop  was  not  installed  on  the 

TMS.  

      Figure: Showing sharp edges on bullet 

 
 

Our member drew the following lessons from the incident: 

♦  Umbilical re-termination procedures to be revised: 

–  Prevent flat edge on the cone and use machine tools to prevent surface roughness inside the socket, all edges to be 

–  Use of a booster pack at temperatures above 9°C not in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and is 

rounded and polished. 

strongly advised against. 

♦  Emergency strop to be mounted on TMS systems; 

♦  Bullet design to be approved and quality checked before use;    

Members may also wish to refer to: 

IMCA R 004 - Code of practice for the safe and efficient operation of remotely operated vehicles 

IMCA R 011 - The initial and periodic examination, testing and certification of ROV handling systems 

3  Near miss: Dropped Object - falling camera 

A member has reported an incident in which the mounting for a fixed camera gave way allowing the camera, weighing 25kg, 
to fall 4 metres. Electrical cable and a gland held it in place, preventing the camera from landing on the deck. This happened in 
an area where personnel could have been working. There were no injuries.  

Figure:  Camera of the sort that fell 

 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The equipment was so reliable that it had become part of the fixtures and therefore “invisible”; 

♦  Weak fastening / mounting; 

♦  Securing wire not fit for purpose; 

♦  Possibility of excessive vibration from nearby machinery; 

♦  The camera had not been identified as a potential dropped object. 

The following lessons were learnt and corrective actions taken: 

♦  Similar cameras are now secured with wire (safety sling); 

♦  Recommended inspection routine advised based on physical and environmental circumstances. 

 
4  Near Miss: Dropped Objects During Lifting Operations 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  pieces  of  angle  bar  slipped  out  of  slings  and  fell  into  the  sea.  The  incident 
occurred when the crew of a platform supply vessel used slings instead of a cargo basket, as the means to hoist a cargo of 
angle bar up to a rig.  

A number of factors made this incident of particular concern to our member: 

♦  No cargo baskets were available for this job – use of an approved cargo basket would have prevented this incident; 

♦  The slings used were provided by a 3rd party contractor and were of uneven lengths, which caused the load to hang at 

–  The  crane  operator  assumed  that  the  incident  would  be  reported  by  someone  else  and  thus  did  not  report  the 

an angle, and the bars to fall into the sea; 

♦  No proper near miss report was made at the time of the incident: 

dropped object himself. 

–  No report was made until 10 days after the incident. 

Our member noted the following: 

♦  Where possible, cargo baskets should be used for pipes, metal bars and other objects that can easily fall out of slings; 

♦  Crew  should  be  reminded  that  when  using  slings  or  other  lifting  gear,  care  should  be  taken  to  select  the  appropriate 

♦  ALL incidents and near misses should be reported, no matter if one believes that someone else has reported it, or how 

equipment for the job at hand; 

trivial the matter may seem. 

Members should refer to the following IMCA documents, in particular the pocket safety cards which are intended for use by 
vessel crews:  

IMCA SEL 019 - Guidelines for lifting operations 

IMCA SPP 04 - Avoiding dropped objects 

IMCA SPC 05 - Lifting equipment 

IMCA SPC 12 - Avoiding dropped objects 

5  Failure of Connector on Marine Riser 

The U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Gulf of Mexico OCS Region (BSEE) 
has published the following report regarding a pollution incident involving the discharge of synthetic base mud (SBM) into the 
sea due to a loss of integrity of a connector on a LMRP (lower marine riser package).  

The report can be downloaded from http://www.bsee.gov/uploadedFiles/BSEE/Regulations/Safety_Alerts/SA-303.pdf  

 

 

