SAFETY FLASH 

 April 2019 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/19 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1  Unpublished Safety Incidents 

IMCA  has  been  notified  of  slightly  more  than  200  safety  incidents  in  the  15  months  since  the  start  of  2018.  
Approximately two thirds of these come from IMCA members; the remainder come from other trade bodies and 
regulatory organisations, including the  Marine  Safety Forum  (MSF), the UK  HSE, the  United States  Coast Guard 
(USCG)  and  the  US  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE).    Most  incidents,  but  not  all,  are 
published.  In the last 15 months,  IMCA elected not to publish 33 incidents.   All but  four of those  unpublished 
incidents came from IMCA members. 

In many cases where the incident details were not published as part of an IMCA safety flash, the received incident 
notification  was  deemed  to  not  have  adequate  scope  for  learning  meaningful  lessons,  or  the  necessary  effort 
required to prepare the incident would not return sufficient value to members.  27 of the 33 incidents fall into these 
two  categories.    Members  are  reminded  that  the  decision  whether  or  not  to  publish  an  incident  is  necessarily 
subjective and editorial in nature. 

The following criteria may lead to submitted incidents being passed over: 

  The  incident  involves  a  serious  personal  injury  which  has  not  been  properly  captured  in  the  original 

communique; 

  The incident report has a tendency to either shift responsibility or to apportion blame; 

  The incident report uses safety jargon but fails to identify fundamental and obvious corrective actions; 

  The incident report is too long and complex for a relatively minor incident (an example would be a non-serious 

slip/trip where the incident report ran to 11 pages); 

  The incident report is too brief for a serious incident (an example would be an incident involving LTIs, dealt with 

in less than two hundred words, with no discussion of what happened to the injured person); 

  The incident report comes in a form that cannot be rendered into an IMCA safety flash in a timely way – for 

example, incident reports delivered as a scanned PDF image, or in very difficult to understand English;  

  The incident report contains no photographs, diagrams or images to support and/or explain the text. 

Safety flashes exist to raise safety standards and thus to reduce incidents and injuries.  They do this by bringing to 
the attention of members’ employees, issues of critical safety importance, and thus enabling lessons to be learned.  
It  is  important,  therefore,  to  guard  the  impact  and  appeal  of  safety  flashes.    Just  as  would  any  media  news 
publication, we do this by choosing with care what material we do and do not publish.  

What matters is not  that every incident is published, but  that every incident published, and  safety  flashes as a 
whole, tell a coherent story.  It is this safety story that delivers lessons learned and the improvements in safety.  It 
is the safety story that changes attitudes, hearts and minds.  

Incidents where there is no permission to publish 

The other main reason IMCA does not publish incidents is because members fail to give clear permission to publish.  
In three cases, this was because there has been no response after repeated attempts over months, from the safety 
professional responsible for reviewing and approving the draft.  Given the volume of good quality safety reporting 
and information we do receive, further attempts to get permission to publish these is not a good use of time and 
resources, and the unpublished incident is abandoned.   

The third reason is related to the second – the member who shared the incident has subsequently given us clear 
instructions not to publish, normally for reasons relating to legal or commercial complexities.  

A short topical summary of the 33 unpublished incidents:  

  Vessels and seamanship: 

−  gangway incidents 
−  hose ruptured during pumping of oil 
−  damage to deployed equipment   
−  vessel collision   
−  vessel inadvertently crossed international border following navigation errors 
−  potential collision due to COLREG violation; 

 

Injuries and health: 
−  crewman cut hand   
−  hand injury during cargo operation  
− 

injury on ROV LARS step 

−  gas quads fell over causing injury  
−  outbreak of chicken pox; 

  Anchoring and mooring: 

−  anchor chain collar parted  
−  anchor lost during mooring operations 
−  anchor wire broke, vessel lost anchor 
− 

incorrectly weighted monkey’s fist; 

 

Lifting: 
−  crane boom broke 
− 

failure of subsea lifting equipment 

− 

incorrect bridle hook up 
−  main crane wire parted; 

  Small boats: 

−  unsafe condition - anomaly during lifeboat lowering  
−  broken lifeboat wire; 

  Relating to diving: 

−  SAT diving carried out with unmarked umbilical 
−  neck corrosion in gas bottles; 

  Other: 

−  dropped object in shipyard 
−  cutting and grinding safety 
−  equipment failure – gas release from valve plug 

−  equipment failure – shackles 
− 

failures when incorrectly closing out planned maintenance tasks 

− 

− 

− 

− 

− 

fake BOSIET certificates 

fire in a store – ceiling fan 

safety valve actuator explosion 

zipper adhesive failure impacting immersion suits  

tyre damage to helicopter from helideck lighting. 

2 

Transferee Stepping from Gangway to Staircase During Rotation 

What happened? 

During extraction of working teams from offshore wind farm turbine towers in poor weather, a transferee found 
himself on a gangway as it disconnected.  Weather and sea conditions deteriorated faster than was forecast; the 
decision was taken to extract personnel from a number of turbine towers.  

Three teams were safely extracted from three towers.  During the transfer of the fourth team, the last person to 
cross (the team leader) began his transfer.  When he was approximately halfway across, an alarm sounded, and the 
traffic light turned to red.  The transferee continued across the gangway, but as he reached the end of the gangway 
at the vessel end, the gangway reached its extension limit and self-activated auto disconnection. 

The equipment is programmed to slew to the right (towards stowed position on the vessel).  As slewing occurred, 
the transferee continued forward to get off the gangway platform.  While slewing, the guard rail of the rotating 
platform passed by the posts on the static part of the platform with approximately 19cm clearance between them.  
Since  the  transferee  continued  his  transfer,  he  exposed  himself  to  a  potential  crush  hazard.    The  gangway 
completed its slew into its stowed position and the transferee safely exited the gangway platform. 

The  gangway  safety  induction  video  stated  to  return  to  vessel  or  brace  in  case  of  an  alarm,  depending  on  the 
transferee position on the gangway (static part of telescopic part). 

Figure 1: Photo of gangway and railings 

Figure 2: Screenshot from gangway operator’s induction 

 

 

video 

  The  immediate  cause  was  found  to  be  failure  to  follow  gangway  instructions;  the  transferee  continued  to 

What were the causes 

transfer from gangway to vessel; 

  Root causes identified were: 

− 

− 

insufficient awareness and lack of risk perception of transferee 

insufficient design risk assessment – design of platform 

−  unclear instructions – induction gives ambiguous guidance on correct action if alarm sounds.  Instructions 
are to transfer to vessel (when on static part of gangway), rather than continue to gangway platform and 
await instructions to continue transfer to vessel: 

  Contributing causal factors identified were: 

−  bad weather – wind noise contributed to confusion on the gangway; 
−  unsafe construction – crush hazard was inherent to design of platform; 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  The vessel Master noted that the post which forms part of the hazard is actually superfluous to operation and 
the necessary safety features of the gangway and platforms and could be removed without any effect.  The 
post was removed; 

  All crew were to refamiliarize with the gangway transfer safety video; 

  Manufacturer of gangway contacted with suggestion to review/revise their design risk assessment with respect 

to position of poles on fixed platform in relation to proximity to gates on rotating gangway platform; 

  A further lesson learned is that gangway instructions differ per gangway manufacturer/operator, which causes 

confusion amongst transferees.  

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Near Miss During Transfer Operations from a crew transfer vessel (CTV) to a turbine tower 

  Near Miss Incidents During Personnel Transfer To Offshore Renewable Energy Installations 

  Crew Transfer Vessel Trapped Under A Boat Landing [in deteriorating weather conditions] 

  MSF: Three Potential Near Misses During Cargo Operations [in deteriorating weather conditions] 

3  Near Miss: Cargo Shifted on Deck in Heavy Weather 

What happened? 

A platform supply vessel (PSV) was on ‘stand-by’ near an offshore Installation waiting on weather.  Owing to the 
sea conditions, the vessel was pitching and rolling heavily.  A load of 20'' casing had been back-loaded earlier; this 
load covered two-thirds of the width of the deck on the port side and was stacked two layers high.  The casing was 
secured  with  pipe 
stanchion  pins.  
However,  on  taking  a  particularly  heavy 
roll  to  starboard,  the  pipe  stanchions 
sheared,  causing  the  load  to  move/roll 
approximately 3m to starboard, ending up 
resting against other back loaded cargo. 

Weather conditions at the time were: wind 
gusting up to 45 knots, sea state: 5-6m.  As 
per vessel procedures, no personnel were 
on deck at the time. 

What went wrong? 

Both stanchion pins sheared at the base/weld (see images below).  

 

 

 

It is believed this incident happened because there was a small gap of 10–15 cm between the forward pin and the 
casing, which allowed additional load on the after pin when the vessel was rolling, thus causing the aft pin to shear.  
The  most  recent  visual  inspections  of  the  pins  were  within  the  last  three  months  and  were  found  to  be  in  a 
satisfactory condition.  However, it was later identified that the pins were several years old and had been in use 
frequently during adverse weather/winter conditions. 

  Poor back-load planning (space between tubular and stanchion pin allowed movement); 

What were the causes? 

 

Incorrect securing method; 

  The welds on stanchion pins failed; 

  Weather and sea conditions. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned?  

 

Increased focus on back-load planning and placement of equipment on deck: 
−  box  in  loads  with  heavier  back-load  (this  would  have  occurred  on  this  vessel,  however,  in  this  case 

operations were suspended by the crane operator on the installation, due to excessive wind speed); 

  Re-assessment of life-span of securing pins.  All pins were replaced with new and welds were subject to non-

  During  loading/back-loading  of  casing,  risk  assessment  regarding  possible  additional  stanchion  pins  was 

destructive examination (NDE); 

needed, especially during winter periods. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Near miss: cargo shifted in heavy seas whilst alongside platform  

  Near miss: ROV Broke Free Of Cargo Strops During Heavy Seas 

  Able Seaman injured when vessel moved during cargo operations 

4  Uncontrolled Release of Walk to Work Gangway 

What happened? 

A  walk-to-work  (W2W)  gangway  system  broke  loose  from  its  connection  point.    The  incident  occurred  during 
transfer of four persons to an offshore wind installation.  The first person got the green light (operated manually) 
to transfer across and did so without problems.  After the first person had transferred, the system moved up and 
down and  slipped  upwards  from  its  push-on  point  and  came  into  contact  with  a  floor  grating  that  came  loose, 
resulting in minor damage.  The transfer was aborted, and further transfers were done using a CTV (crew transfer 
vessel). 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

  The gangway system was tested before the incident and it was observed that the system seemed to be reacting 
slower than normal, but as it performed well under tests earlier that day it was agreed between operator and 
captain to start operations; 

  There were slight differences in the push-on point design on this installation (a substation) than on the turbine 

towers (see illustration); 

  The weather and sea state at the time was within the working limits for the gangway system (actual 1.5 m and 

15 knots versus design 3m Hs & 30 knots wind). 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

 

Investigation of the software control for the gangway system Active Motion Compensation (AMC) revealed that the 
performance for boom motion was not optimal.  Corrections were made to the software parameters. 

The  primary  cause  was  found  to  be  that  due  to  reduced  accuracy of  the  AMC,  the  vertical  force  acting  on  the 
connection point led to connection failure. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

Corrective steps to prevent future incidents: 

  AMC performance to be verified during annual inspection; 

  Before connecting the gangway, position the gangway approximately 1m from connection point, visually verify 

that AMC is stable and that the control error is within reasonable limits; 

  Verify that the connection point is designed to fit the gangway with respect to shape and load. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

 

LTI: feet trapped in motion compensated telescopic gangway 

  Crane Motion Reference Unit (MRU) malfunctions after overheating 

  Near Miss During Transfer Operations from a crew transfer vessel (CTV) to a turbine tower 

  Near Miss Incidents During Personnel Transfer To Offshore Renewable Energy Installations 

5  Vessel Hit Moored Barge Whilst Turning 

What happened? 

Whilst turning in a river port, a vessel collided with a moored barge.  The vessel`s port quarter grazed the starboard 
bow of the barge at around 0.1 knots.  Damage to the vessel was not extensive, but the cost of repairing the damage 
to the barge was estimated to be US$350,000. 

The incident occurred when the vessel was required to turn in a smaller turning basin than usual, in which there 
was a barge moored alongside a terminal within the turning radius of the vessel.  The estimated turning area was 
290 metres across; the barge was 17 metres wide and the vessel was 244 metres long.  This left a very small margin 
of 29 metres. 

 

 

Damage to the Barge  

Damage to the Bollards  

Damage to the vessel 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The vessel turned in a smaller turning basin to save time and avoid traffic whilst a barge was moored alongside 
an oil terminal present in the vessel’s turning radius.  The original plan was to turn in a larger turning basin 
further up the river; 

  The bridge team did not challenge the Pilot`s orders or intervene; 

  Risk seen as tolerable: the deviation from the  current  voyage  plan for pilotage waters was based on pilot’s 

advice only and not properly assessed by the bridge team as it ought to have been;  

  Complacency: the vessel crew had turned their vessel here before on several occasions, and had two pilots 

present on the bridge; 

 

Inadequate supervision: there was misjudgement of vessel movement, external forces (wind, current) and of 
the clearance to the barge. 

What lessons were learned? 

  Better communication with the Pilot and with mooring teams, regarding turning ranges to the shore/bank of 

the river and other vessels alongside the berth before starting turn; 

  Avoid turning where there is only marginally enough room; 

  Be more fully aware of vessel manoeuvring characteristics and inform the Pilot accordingly.   

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Near Miss: Sailing close to a construction barge 

  Near Miss: Unauthorised Release Of Shore-Controlled Mooring Lines 

  Collision between OSV and barge  

