AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 17/09 

Safety Flash 

December 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1 

Injury During Personnel Transfer Capsule Operation 

A  member  has  reported  an  incident  in  which  a  person  was  injured  during  a  personnel  transfer  capsule  operation.    Three 
persons  involved  in  pipeline commissioning  activities  on  a  recently  installed  jacket  were  preparing  for  a  personnel  transfer 
back to the vessel from which they had initially been transferred.  The method of transfer was to be by the transfer capsule. 

Prior to the actual lift, a swing developed on the crane’s headache ball.  The swing gathered momentum, despite the efforts of 
the  crane  operator  to  stop  it,  until  it  eventually  hit  one  of  the  platform’s  legs  and  ricocheted  into  the  capsule  frame.  
A section of the crane rigging and headache ball hit the frame of the  transfer capsule before sliding into the interior of the 
frame and impacting one of the three occupants. 

The injured person was medevaced to hospital for attention.  After a thorough medical examination and precautionary tests, 
the worker was released that same evening and deemed fit to return to work for light duties. 

Jacket showing personnel transfer capsule and crane wire 

 

Following investigation, the following findings were made: 

  Alternative arrangements for accessing the platform had been identified but not considered; 

  For  this  work,  the  personnel  transfer  capsule  should  have  been  identified  as  the  primary  means  in  the  event  of  an 

  The  crane  operator  had  received  no  training  for  transfer  capsule  operations  even  though  this  omission  had  been 

  The transfer capsule operation had taken place safely on two previous occasions and thorough risk management controls 

  On this occasion the risk assessment for the operation had not taken into account a number of important factors and 

necessary risk control measures were not implemented; 

emergency only; 

identified during risk assessment; 

had been followed and implemented; 

 

  Procedures specific for vessel to platform (jacket) transfer were not followed; 

  The personnel transfer capsule was not lowered on to the jacket in the area originally specified during risk assessment; 

  The size of the area to which the capsule was lowered was not in compliance with the manufacturer’s recommendations; 

  On this occasion the crane operator did not lay the headache ball down on the jacket during the boarding of the  capsule 

because of worsening swell conditions and restrictions on landing area (see picture); 

  The personnel being transferred took longer than normally required to secure themselves within the capsule; 

  The sea state in this region is known to produce a ‘larger swell’ at irregular intervals.  This was the case in this event as a 

‘rogue swell’ was also involved in causing the initial swing on the headache ball; 

  A  shift  change  had  taken  place  between  the  initial  lift  on  to  the  jacket  and  the  recovery  from  the  jacket  back  to  the 
vessel.  The crane operator was the same throughout but the deck foreman and his crew were all new to the operation 
and not been involved in the task risk assessment (TRA) or toolbox talks. 

The following actions were recommended: 

  Risk management processes should be followed thoroughly for all high potential operations and repeated every time an 

operation is carried out.  This is even more important when operations are carried out by different personnel; 

  Actions  identified  during  risk  assessments  should  be  fully  closed  out  before  operations  begin.    In  this  instance  crane 

operator training had not been carried out; 

  Management  of  change  processes  should  always  be  followed  whenever  circumstances  change  during  an  operation.  

If necessary the operation should be stopped whilst this is carried out; 

  All personnel involved in an operation should be fully briefed beforehand during the toolbox talk; 

  Manufacturers’ instructions and recommendations on the use of equipment should be followed; 

  All personnel have a responsibility to intervene and stop an operation which is clearly unsafe. 

2  Loading and Securing of Containers 

A member has reported several occurrences over recent months of containers being inappropriately loaded and transported 
with contents in an unsecured and consequently unsafe manner and seeks to highlight this as a safety issue.  It had come to 
the attention of the  company that unsafe packing of containers is something that is still evident, in spite of this issue being 
addressed in recent years.  The potential exists for injury, environmental impact or equipment damage caused by unsecured 
cargo moving in the container or spilling out when the doors are opened. The company highlighted some recent examples of 
poor practice: 

The grab handle of this blue steel case has not been secured 

The contents of a freight container are left unsecured. 

 and the case is resting on top of other equipment 

Some are labelled as fragile 

 

 

 

This item is secured in an inadequate manner 

(nylon strapping) for its weight and value 

This heavy item was loaded in closed container 

making it very difficult to unload offshore 

 

 

 

 

Orange clump weights (500kg) unsecured 

and stored on top of lighter materials 

Heavy and valuable motor left unsecured for transit 

Consideration should be given to the safety of the people at the receiving end and also their material handling capabilities.  
The loading of containers should be planned to facilitate the ease of unloading on arrival at the destination. 

  Place  contents  in  suitable  containers,  giving  consideration  to  material  handling  capabilities  of  those  receiving  the  load 

The following actions were suggested: 

(i.e. forklift availability, access, container type); 

  Distribute the contents evenly over the floor to maintain balance; 

  Place heavier items at the bottom with lighter goods on top – do not place heavy cargo on top of fragile cargo; 

  Use packing materials to prevent damage between items of cargo; 

  Always lash down (and wedge if necessary) cargo to prevent movement in transit; 

  Do not pack sharp items next to soft skinned drums; 

  Certain chemicals and materials, when combined (possibly through transit damage), can become toxic, highly flammable 

or explosive – such materials should be kept separate; 

  Ensure the doors and locking mechanisms are secure with locking device attached (including secondary securing device) 

and where applicable, use door safety nets; 

  Ensure no loose items have been left on the roof of containers. 

There is sufficient industry guidance available regarding the safe packing and handling of cargo to and from offshore locations 
and the International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code should also be followed.  Additionally, following the guidance 
in IMCA SEL 019 – Guidelines for lifting operations – should help prevent such occurrences. 

