AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/99 

November 1999 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links  Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  SOPEP Oil Booms 

One of our members has alerted us to a problem with one type of SOPEP oil boom – type SMB40. 

SPOEP  oil  booms  are  normally  manufactured  using  blown  polypropylene  as  the  absorbing  membrane,  contained  within  an 
outer cover manufactured and sewn together using polypropylene.  Whilst polypropylene will begin to melt at 160°C, it will 
not support combustion. 

Type  SMB40 oil booms have  been  found to  be  covered  in nylon,  which  will burn  rapidly  when  in  contact  with an  ignition 
source. 

The  member  involved  has  instructed  all  of  its  vessels  to  remove  these  booms  from  service  and  has  informed  us  that  the 
manufacturer has withdrawn this type of boom from offshore sale and use. 

2  Automatic Control – Navigation Problem 

We have recently had reported to us this near-miss concerning an ROV support vessel and an unmanned installation.  The 
vessel was operating under automatic control with the platform selected in the outboard navigation computer as the target 
destination. 

On approaching the 500m zone, the on-shift Chief Officer commenced operations to position the vessel outside the 500m 
zone for field arrival trials. 

However,  as  a  result  of  his  omission  to  deselect  automatic  control,  the  vessel  failed  to  respond  as  he  had  expected  and 
continued into the platform 500m zone at a speed of between three and six knots. 

The Vessel Master, who was also on the bridge, realised that the automatic control had not been deselected.  He changed to 
manual mode and stopped the vessel short of the platform. 

The vessel is reported to have come within 10-60m of the structure. 

Following the incident, the vessel departed the 500m zone and satisfactorily completed standard field arrival trials prior to 
starting DP operations. 

The  company  involved  has  noted  that  the  incident,  which  occurred  on  the  UKCS,  occurred  as  a  result  of  the  failure  to 
comply with UKOOA’s ‘Guidelines for the Safe Operation of Offshore Support Vessels’, Section 3 ‘Way Points’, compounded by 
operator error.  A number of corrective actions have been taken by the company to prevent recurrence of this situation.  

3  Failure of a ½” BSP Cap Under Pressure on Well Service Work 

The following incident was recently reported to us.  It occurred on an offshore installation where the ½” BSP cap appears to 
have blown off a pressure testing manifold under approximately 1200psi of water pressure.  The cap and BSP/NPT connector 
were rated to 45000psi.  The cap was not found, so the conclusions are based on the following assumptions: 

1.  The cap was not fully engaged; 

2. 

It was over-tightened. 

 

system; 

The key lessons learned from the incident were identified as: 

1.  Be  aware  of  the  ratings,  tightening  procedures  and  limitations  of  all  pressure  fittings  used  in  a  temporary  pressure 

2.  Pressure fittings should be in good condition prior to use – in particular, threads should be free of paint and debris.  If in 

doubt, use new fittings.  

