AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 17/13 

Safety Flash 

 November 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  High Potential Dropped Object 

A member has reported an incident in which  a heavy steel bar fell 10m onto the deck. The incident occurred during ROV 
deployment, when a round steel bar weighing approximately 20 kg became detached from above the cursor frame umbilical 
drum mechanism and fell approximately 10m onto the deck (moonpool doors). The object fell and struck the deck and then 
rolled  under  the  ROV  transfer  plinth.  There  were no  injuries  or  damaged  caused,  though  at  the  time  one  member  of  the 
ROV deployment crew was standing in the moonpool area approximately 2-3m away from the point of impact and the ROV 
was approximately 1.5m off the deck. 

The ROV launch operation was immediately stopped, the  ROV was lowered back to deck, the item recovered, operations 
were suspended and investigations began.  

ROV umbilical 

Steel bar that fell 

Securing mechanism 

 

Figure: Showing ROV umbilical winch drum from which steel bar fell 

Figure: Looking to the top of the ROV hangar at the cursor and cursor winch 

 

 
Our members’ investigation revealed the following: 

  The  steel  bar  was  identified  as  having  come  from  above  the  cursor  frame  umbilical  drum.  It  was  used  to  stop  the 

umbilical jumping on the drum;  

  During a maintenance period (5 months prior to this incident), to upgrade parts of the existing ROV launch & recovery 
system, the manufacturer had fitted a guide above the drum as an improvement to the  incumbent system. The function 
of this steel bar was to stop the umbilical jumping and fouling; 

  The cause of the incident was found to be: three separate steel bars were fitted to a holding  guide frame  and held  in 
place with bolts at each end. The ROV umbilical on the drum was rubbing against the guide causing the bolts to loosen 
over a 5 month period. This was due to there being insufficient clearance between the round steel bar and the umbilical 
when on the cursor drum. 

Our member made the following recommendations:   

  Weekly inspection checks on the steel bar guides, inspection interval to be reviewed, confirmed and included in planned 

maintenance system;  

 

Inspection to include confirming a minimum of 5mm clearance between the guide bar and umbilical; 

  Ensure that the securing bolts are tight and torqued on all guide bars; 

  A  secondary  securing  device  to  be  fitted  to  the  round  bars  and  this  to  be  inspected  during  the  planned  inspection. 

Remedial hold back on all three guide bars as a temporary measure put in place;  

  All  future  alterations  in  plant  and  equipment  plant  to  be  suitably  communicated,  risk  assessed  and  a  management  of 

change exercise conducted with all the interested parties;  

  Onboard inspection of work areas to identify potential dropped objects with particular reference to the following areas: 

-  Below lifting operations; 
-  Cranes; 
-  Elevated work areas or platforms; 
-  Work spaces where equipment is mounted overhead. 

Members may wish to make use of additional IMCA resources as follows: 

 

IMCA SPC 12 - Avoiding Dropped Objects. 

2  Small  Workboats  Used  on  Offshore  Wind  Farms:  Combined  Report  on  Windcat  9  &  Island 

Panther Incidents     

The  UK  Marine  Accident  Investigation  Branch  (MAIB)  has  published  a  combined  report  on  two  incidents  involving  small 
workboats in the offshore renewables sector.  The first incident is a contact with a floating target by the wind farm passenger 
transfer catamaran Windcat 9; the second, the contact of Island Panther with a wind turbine tower.  

It  is  worth  quoting  the  UK  Chief  Inspector  of  Marine  Accidents  from  the  foreword  of  the  document:  “The  two  accidents 
featured  in  this  report  occurred  on  the  same  day  but  in  different  circumstances.  However,  they  share  many  common  safety  issues 
especially with respect to the standard of watch-keeping observed by the crews of both vessels. In particular, the MAIB’s investigations 
have highlighted a need for robust crew recruitment, training and assessment procedures to ensure the supply of mariners with the right 
skills.  Flexible  but  rigorous  watch-keeping  practices  are  necessary  together  with  recognition  by  the  industry  and  regulator  that  the 
reliance on paper charts to navigate high-speed passenger transfer vessels is impractical and does not reflect the current custom of the 
trade. 

Perhaps the most noteworthy outcomes of the two investigations is the conclusion that there is a compelling need  for the burgeoning 
offshore  renewable  energy  industry  to  produce  a  comprehensive  best  practice  guide  for  operators  of  workboats  and  to  develop  an 
effective  means  for  promulgating  safety  lessons  across  the  industry.  Recommendations  have  been  made  to  industry  stakeholders  to 
progress these two aims in a collaborative way.  

There is an opportunity for the offshore renewable energy industry to establish, at an early stage of its development, a shared safety 
culture which, if the opportunity is taken, will undoubtedly prevent accidents and save lives in the future.” 

The report can be downloaded from: 
www.maib.gov.uk/publications/investigation_reports/2013/windcat_9_and_island_panther_combined_report.cfm  

 
3  Pilot Ladder Safety 

Incident 1 – Pilot Ladders 

The  Oil  Companies  International  Marine  Forum  (OCIMF)  has  circulated  the  following  safety  flash,  regarding  pilot  ladder 
safety:  

An inspector was boarding a 1.5 year old ship via a pilot ladder, used in combination with the accommodation ladder. As the 
inspector was half way up the ladder, one of the side ropes parted leaving the inspector on the ladder with only one rope.  
Fortunately,  the  other  side  rope  held  and  the  inspector  went  back  down  to  the  launch  and  boarded  the  ship  after  a  new 
ladder was deployed. 

Upon boarding the ship, the inspector checked the damaged ladder and reported that, while the ladder generally appeared to 
be in good condition, the rope had parted at the upper end where an eye was formed around a thimble to allow for securing 
the ladder. 

The  rope  around  the  thimble  was  covered  with  (heat  shrunk)  plastic,  which  did  not  allow  that  part  of  the  rope  to  be 
inspected before use.  

As it turned out, the rope under the plastic covering was completely rotten. 

Incident 2 – A near miss with Embarkation Ladders 

A near miss report on a ship outlined that, as part of the safety routines on board, the master inspected the ship’s lifeboat 
embarkation  ladders,  and  noted  that  the  thimble  eye  by  which  the  ladder  secured  to  the  deck  had  been  covered  in  heat 
shrunk plastic.  

The Master did not approve of this, and asked for these coverings to be removed and the rope inspected. 

The covering was removed and, upon inspection, it was noted that the rope was rotten underneath.   

Considering that the rope was only about two years old, this deterioration would not have been noted, nor expected, and 
could have resulted in a serious accident or fatality with worse consequences if the ladder were to be used in an emergency. 

These incidents highlight the importance of regularly inspecting every part of all ropes that are deployed on board, whether 
for safety equipment or for mooring operations. 

 

 

Figure: showing plastic covering under which the rope was rotten 

 

 
4  LTI - Pilot Ladder Failure 

The  Marine  Safety  Forum  has  published  the  following  safety  flash,  regarding  an  incident  in  which  both  ropes  on  a  ladder 
parted simultaneously, causing the pilot to fall approximately two metres to the deck of the launch. The pilot sustained a lost 
time injury to his ankle.   

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.marinesafetyforum.org/upload-files//safetyalerts/msf-safety-flash-13.34.pdf  

5  Near Miss: Fast Rescue Craft Unplanned Descent  

The Australian National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority (NOPSEMA) has published the 
following  safety  flash,  regarding  an  unplanned  descent  (from  23m)  of  a  fast  rescue  craft  from  its  davit,  whilst  crew  were 
onboard. There were no injuries or damage to equipment.  

The  safety  flash  can  be  downloaded  from  www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/alert/Safety-Alert-57-Fast-Rescue-Craft-unplanned-
descent-Aug-2013.pdf 

