AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 05/14 

Safety Flash 

 April 2014 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Saturation 

1  Decompression  Illness  (DCI)  Incident  during  Routine  Decompression  of  Divers  from 

A member has reported a decompression illness incident during a routine and planned decompression of divers in saturation 
chambers from a storage depth of -160 metres sea water (msw).  During the course of the decompression one of the divers 
complained of pain in his pelvis and knees.  The pressure in the saturation chamber at the time of the incident was -93 msw.  

Following  this  report  a  Diver  Medical  Technician  (DMT)  inside  the  chamber  carried  out  a  physical  and  neurological 
examination of the affected diver.  This found that, aside from the presence of pain in both knees and hips, the condition of 
the diver appeared essentially normal.  On a scale of one to ten the pain experienced by the diver was described as a two.  
An initial diagnosis of Type 1 (mild) decompression illness was made. 

In  accordance  with  standard  diving  procedures  the  diver  was  recompressed  to  a  depth  where  the  pain  disappeared  (-128 
msw).    He  was  then  provided  with  a  suitable  therapeutic  gas  treatment  mixture  through  the  chamber  built-in  breathing 
system (BIBS).  On advice from the contracted diving specialist medical adviser the diver (and his two colleagues) were then 
stabilised and observed at -128 metres for a period of twelve hours.  Thereafter normal decompression was recommenced.   
No  re-occurrence  of  symptoms  was  experienced  by  the  diver  and  the  team  reached  surface  without  further  mishap.  
Following a standard bend watch period all the divers were released to return to their homes.   

An investigation team considered if any of the following physiological and environmental factors known to influence DCI had 
caused or contributed to the incident: 

♦  physical fitness/obesity; 

♦  dehydration; 

♦  age; 

♦  meals; 

♦  exertion; 

♦ 

temperature; 

♦  previous history of DCI; 

♦  multiple dives; 

♦  omitted decompression; 

♦  drugs and alcohol; 

♦  sleep pattern and conditions; 

♦  emotional state / stress. 

♦  nature of dive profiles, including upwards and downwards excursions; 

In addition the investigation team examined the competence and compliance to process of key personnel. 

The  investigators  concluded  that  the  incident  could  only  be  attributed  to  the  individual  diver’s  physiology.    However,  the 
following findings were identified: 

♦  The diver’s level of hydration at the time of the incident could not be categorically confirmed; 

♦  Non-approved personal vitamin/protein supplements were taken into saturation; 

 
♦  No deviations from approved procedure were observed; 

♦  Competence levels were high; 

♦  The diving contractor maintained a very good diving safety culture. 

The following recommendations were made: 

♦  Health check, water/fluid intake and urine colour questions should be asked on a daily basis, and the results should be 

♦  Bag  searches  should  be  conducted  prior  to  entering  saturation  to  ensure  only  controlled  items  can  be  taken  into 

recorded; 

saturation; 

♦  Personal vitamin/protein supplements need to be declared prior to entering saturation. 

Members may wish to look at the following similar incident: 

♦ 

IMCA SF 04/04 – Incident 3 Late Onset of Decompression Illness (DCI)  

2  RWC: Injury to Foot Caused By Moving Roller 

A member has reported an incident in which a person sustained an injury to his right foot caused by a moving roller in pipe-
handling  equipment.  The  injury  happened  when  a  crewman  took  a  window  of  opportunity  during  a  short  repair  period  to 
paint pipe numbers on the ends of the pipes. The operator of the roller did not ensure that the area was clear moving the 
roller, and the crewman was caught by the roller and sustained a crush injury to the right foot. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure: (L) showing position of injured person’s right foot 

Figure: (R) Showing injured person’s position at time of incident 

 

 

 

Pipe roller operator 

IP position 

Figure: (Above) diagram of incident site 

  

 

♦  Operator operating the roller machines failed to ensure the ramp way/area was clear before activating the pipe transfer 

 
Our member’s investigation revealed the following: 

machines; 

♦  There was a lack of supervision from the work supervisor; 

♦  The operator of the roller machine was not able to communicate effectively with other workers. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

♦  The task of numbering of pipes was transferred to another, safer, location; 

♦  An alarm warning system was installed to alert the operator of the presence of personnel in the path of the rollers; 

♦  Signage was installed warning personnel that they were ‘in the line of fire’ in this location. 

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (key words: pipe, roll) 

♦ 

♦ 

IMCA SF 08/06 – Incident 2 Serious injury during pipestalk rolling operation; 

IMCA SF 10/02 – Incident 1 Pipe stacking fatality. 

3  Snubber Failure 

A member has reported the discovery of a failure to a snubber on an ROV launch and recovery system. This was discovered 
during maintenance and annual load test of the ROV. When the tether management system (TMS) was separated from the 
ROV to facilitate maintenance work, this highlighted that the snubber did not appear to be sitting level. Upon investigation, it 
was found that the starboard snubber guide runner had detached from the snubber. Whilst this did not prevent the snubber 
function from operating, it did result in the snubber not maintaining its level when operating. On closer inspection, the port 
side snubber guide runner was found to have cracked welds also. The failed items were not associated with the load path and 
therefore there was no risk of dropped objects. 

Figure: (Above) showing cracked welds 

 

 
 

 

The  incident  emphasises  the  need  for  thorough  inspections  during  routine  maintenance  tasks  in  order  to  capture  any 
damage, fatigue or abnormalities. 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

♦  Cleaned and prepared area for repair and welding; 

♦  Close visual inspection of the other ROV onboard the vessel. No cracked welds were  observed, but the welding was 

reinforced as a contingency; 

 
♦  Added a six monthly visual inspection of the snubber assembly to company preventative maintenance system.  

Members may wish to review the following similar incidents (key words: weld, failure): 

IMCA SF 08/07 – Incident 1 Failure of Welding on Hyperbaric Rescue Chamber Medical Lock Door Assembly; 

IMCA SF 09/13 – Incident 1 High Potential Near Miss: Dropped ROV/TMS Leading to Equipment Damage. 

4  EPIRB Precautionary Bulletin    

It has come to IMCA’s attention that there are a very small number of instances where certain EPIRB (Emergency Position 
Indicating  Radio  Beacons)  have  failed  a  self-test  procedure.    A  consequence  of  such  failure  may  mean  the  EPIRB  will  not 
operate in an emergency situation. 

The  affected  devices  are  designed  and  manufactured  by  Standard  Communications  Pty  Ltd  and  they  are  marketed  globally 
under the GME brand.  

Further information can be found from www.sarsat.noaa.gov/epirb%20safety%20alert.pdf   

5  Overloading Leads to Catastrophic Failure of Crane Boom     

The  United  States  Department  of  the  Interior  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  has  published  the 
following safety flash regarding an incident in which a crane boom collapsed after being massively overloaded. Investigation 
revealed a number of causes, one being that an  incorrect  load chart was used at the time of the incident. There were no 
injuries.  

The safety flash can be downloaded from www.bsee.gov/uploadedFiles/BSEE/Regulations/Safety_Alerts/SA-308.pdf    

Members may wish to look at the following similar incidents (key words: crane, boom, failure, overload): 

IMCA SF 03/98 – Incident 3 Fatal accident involving a boom crane; 

IMCA SF 07/01 – Incident 2 Dangerous Occurrence involving a Mobile Crane.  

6  Misuse of Beam Clamps as an Electrical Earth   

The  United  States  Department  of  the  Interior  Bureau  of  Safety  and  Environmental  Enforcement  (BSEE)  has  published  the 
following safety alert regarding the use of beam clamps on many  Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) facilities. It is determined 
that the use of beam clamps as electrical grounding conductors could potentially cause fires and present electrical hazards to 
personnel. 

Many offshore construction support vessel (OCSV) facilities are utilizing beam clamps as current carrying external ground to 
meet  the  requirements  in  the  American  Petroleum  Institute  (API)  RP  14F.  The  beam  clamps  are  approved  by  the 
manufacturer to mount and support conduit and cable from structural beams, but NOT as temporary or permanent external 
equipment electrical earthing conductors.   

Further information can be downloaded from www.bsee.gov/uploadedFiles/BSEE/Regulations/Safety_Alerts/SA-309.pdf  

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

 

 

