SAFETY FLASH 

 August 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 18/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Fire in the Accommodation: Electronic Items in Cabins 

What happened? 

An incident occurred on board a vessel which almost escalated into 
a serious accommodation fire.  A crew member finished his work 
for the day and returned to his cabin.  He plugged his mobile phone 
into an extension cable to charge; also plugged into the extension 
cable  was  a  fan  heater.    He  then  proceeded  to  his  bathroom  to 
wash. 

Shortly afterwards the ship’s fire detection system indicated alarms 
in  adjacent  cabins.    At  the  same  time,  another  crew  member 
activated  a  manual  call  point  in  the  alleyway  having  discovered 
smoke.  The ship’s alarm bells were sounded, and announcements 
made for fire teams to muster. 

The  crew  member  emerged  from  his  bathroom  to  find  his  cabin 
filled with smoke and a fire on the desk; both the cabin telephone 
and extension cable were burning.  The crew member attempted 
to extinguish the  fire  by  hitting  it  with  a  pillow,  at  this  point  the 
cabin  telephone  exploded  and  fragments  fell  onto  the  mattress, 
starting a second fire.  The crewmember left his cabin. 

Once  the electricity  had  been  isolated,  the  fire  was  extinguished 
with fire hoses before it could escalate further. 

 

Layout of the desk within the cabin. 

 

Investigation noted that: 

upon discovering fire; 

  There was no evidence of any power surge on the vessel power supply prior to the fire; 

  All crew involved had signed safety management system (SMS) familiarisation forms, including initial actions 

  This class of vessel has wall mounted fixed heaters in the cabins from build. 

 

 
What went wrong? 

  There was no control of personal electronics onboard; there was no testing of portable appliances (whether 

personal items or company supplied items) before use; 

 

Initial reports suggested that the cabin telephone had caught fire independently of any other electronics, until 
reconstruction of the setup was requested and revealed the extension cable and fan heater.   This seriously 
hampered the investigation process. 

Our member noted that events of this sort involving portable electronic equipment have become more common in 
recent years.  

What were the causes? 

  Electrical equipment was not used properly: 

 

there was overloading of an extension cable/multiplug; 

  a number of electrical items (including high powered items) were plugged in and left unobserved 
  heaters, fans and extension cables/multiplugs were bought locally by vessel crew from different sources, 

with no quality control check in place; 

  There was poor housekeeping: 

 

the  heater  was  placed  on  the  chair  and  electronic  equipment  all  laced  together  along  with  wires  and 
extension cables on the desk; 

  The vessel air conditioning and heating equipment were not being used for controlling cabin temperature; 

  The initial reaction of the crew member to attempt to smother the fire with a pillow caused the fire to spread 

and become more serious. 

The following causal factors were identified: 

 

Inadequate procedures:  
  no  control  procedure  or  testing  requirement  was  in  place  for  personal  electronic  equipment  brought 

onboard 

  no requirement for warning signs/information within cabins 
 

insufficient information in company training material with regard to the dangers of overheating electronic 
devices and good housekeeping 

  high powered electrical fan heaters were introduced to cabins without a management of change  (MoC) 

  heaters and fans were bought locally by vessel crew from different sources with no quality control check in 

process or risk assessment 

place; 

 

Inadequate leadership: 
  when  issues  with  vessel’s  air  conditioning  and  heating  systems  affecting  cabin  temperatures  were 
previously reported, onboard management introduced additional equipment rather than solving the issues. 

The root causes our member identified were: 

  Failure to comply: the risk involved was seen as tolerable, and there was lack of awareness of safety; 

 

Internal company management systems were not sufficiently robust. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Add requirement for PAT testing to vessel SMS and planned maintenance system (PMS); 

Implement more appropriate control of personal electronic equipment on board; 

 

 

Investigate and repair vessel air conditioning to ensure that accommodation temperature control using fixed 
vessel equipment is achievable; 

 
  Post appropriate warning signs by sockets in cabins (see illustration above); 

  Retraining  and  refamiliarization  of  crew  on  fire  prevention  on  electrical  equipment,  raising  the  alarm  and 

electrical safety in general.  

IMCA considers that fires arising from inappropriate management of personal electronic items, particularly those 
with Lithium batteries, is a potentially serious and growing risk.  Please see the following similar events: 

 

Laptop Battery Fire (October 2017) 

  Fire in vessel accommodation – overheating notebook computer (September 2016) 

  Mobile Phone Charger Failures (June 2016) 

 

Laptop Battery Fire and explosion (October 2008) 

  Small Fire caused by portable fan heater (December 2007) 

2  Auto-Ignition of Laundry Items 

What happened? 

Cloths used for general galley cleaning were removed from 
a  tumble  dryer,  immediately  folded  and  piled  in  a  steel 
bucket.  Three hours later they were stowed in a cupboard.  
After  a  further  three  hours  (six  hours  after  removing  the 
cloths from the dryer) a burning smell and the presence of 
smoke were reported.  Upon investigation, the cloths were 
found smouldering.    Immediate  action was taken,  and no 
further damage was noted. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  Following  the  fire, 

it  was  discovered  that  the  cloths  were  still 
contaminated.    This  indicates  that  the  items  had  been  washed  at  the 
wrong temperature (40° instead of 90°) to reduce the wash time.   This 
was not sufficient for them to be fully cleaned; 

  Either  the  cloths  were  removed  from  the  tumble  dryer  prior  to 
completion of the full cool down cycle or the wrong temperature setting 
was used (too high).  As a result, the hot contaminated cloths were not 
cooled before being stowed.  This led to them starting to smoulder. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Ensure items are washed at suitable temperatures to remove residue; 

  Ensure  that  the  correct  temperature  setting  is  selected  and  that  cool-

down cycles are completed when using tumble dryers; 

  Hot laundry should never be folded and stowed.  Allow suitable time for 

cooling down; 

  Discard cloths that can no longer be cleaned; 

  Reiterate these lessons to all catering crew. 

IMCA notes that this is an ‘evergreen’ safety issue that has come up often before.  Our members may wish to bring 
this potentially serious issue once again to the attention of their management and crew.  

 
Please see the following: 

  Near Miss: Potential fire in the laundry room (2018) 

 

LTI: Burn to hand while working in laundry (2017) 

  Fire: Spontaneous combustion of towels (two incidents, 2016) 

  Near Miss: Laundry Fire Hazards (two incidents, 2016) 

  Tumble dryer fire onboard a vessel (2009)  

3  High Potential Near Miss Working on Pressurised Pipeline 

What happened? 

During the dewatering of a 6’’ flexible  jumper, a near miss incident occurred when the pull  head was removed 
whilst it was still under pressure.  This resulted in a foam pig that was inside the flexible jumper being unexpectedly 
ejected by the residual pressure.  The pig narrowly missed personnel in the immediate vicinity and landed on the 
ground approximately 2m away from the jumper end. 

The incident had the  potential for serious injury to personnel standing in the line  of fire.   Activities were  being 
controlled and supervised by our member at a third-party worksite. 

Showing 6” pull head that was removed for inspection 

Position of personnel before removal of the 6” pull 

of the foam pig 

head. 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Our member noted the following:  

  The approved procedure for the pressure testing and dewatering activities was not followed correctly (a vent 

valve that should have remained opened at the other end of the jumper was closed); 

  A ‘working copy’ of the approved procedure was not available at the task location for reference by personnel; 

  There was no on-going sign-off being conducted as each task was completed; 

  There  was  no  check  conducted  for  positive  confirmation  that  the  system  was  at  ambient  pressure  before 

starting to remove the pull head to access the foam pig; 

  There was no requirement for formal sign-off/handover of system control from the pre-commissioning services 
company to our members’ personnel who were required to remove the pull head for the foam pig inspection. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  When  lines  have  been  pressurised,  isolation  and  venting  processes  should  be  in  place,  which  ensure  the 

ambient pressure is verified before breaking pressure containment; 

 
  Supervision on worksites should highlight safety critical points within the procedures and ensure that they are 

strictly followed by personnel; 

  Where stored pressure or energy is involved, ensure approved procedures contain requirements for formal 

sign-off/handover of system control, particularly when third party sub-contractors are involved. 

  High potential stored energy incident: inner buoyancy module clamp failure during removal [a causal factor 

Members may wish to refer to the following: 

being failure to properly manage the task] 

  Fatality: Stored Pressure Release 

4  Near Miss: Unplanned Release of 2” Blasting Hose Outlet from Air Receiver Coupling Clamp 

What happened? 

During blasting and painting operations conducted at an onshore worksite, a near miss incident occurred when a 
2” blasting hose outlet released from the coupling clamp connected to an air receiver.  The 2” hose was arrested 
by the hose restraint.  The force from the released energy caused the air receiver to fall sideways striking the ground 
and adjacent objects, resulting in equipment damage.  No personnel were standing in the immediate area or line 
of fire when the incident occurred. 

 

 

 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  The 2” hose dislodged from the hose shank due to an improperly tightened Chicago connector; 

  The air receiver was placed on sand and was unstable and contributed to the air receiver tank falling sideways. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  Ensure that risk assessments are carried out.  Implement controls to ensure that equipment is appropriately 

placed on suitable stable footings (hard standing) and that appropriate restraints are in place; 

  Assess  the  application  of  Chicago  connectors  with  a  view  to  replacing  them  with  alternatives  when  high 

pressure applications are identified; 

 
  Regularly review and inspect all pressure related connections to ensure that they are correctly assembled and 

fitted with adequate whip checks/restraints; 

  Assess that barriers are in place to ensure an effective safe distance is achieved to protect personnel from any 

unplanned pressure release or equipment failure. 

Members may wish to refer to: 

  Failure of high pressure fitting 

  Failure of hydraulic fitting at pressure 

Two older incidents from 2003: 

  Engine start air fitting incident   

  Fatality: Injury From An Air Hose 

5  Unplanned Stored Pressure Release: Worker Struck by Gas Cylinder – Company Fined 

What happened? 

The UK HSE (UK Health and Safety Executive) has fined a company for health and safety breaches after a technician 
was struck by a cylinder and left severely injured on the Brent Delta offshore installation.  Technicians were required 
to replace  a gas cylinder within a system used to extinguish fires.   When one of the technicians rolled what he 
thought was an empty cylinder along the floor and took off the protective cap, he realised that it was a fully charged 
cylinder.  The trigger mechanism on the cylinder was activated causing a loud bang and the instantaneous release 
of the cylinder contents in a white cloud of concentration.  The force of the gas release caused the technician to 
drop the cylinder to the floor, causing a valve to shear.  This resulted in both cylinder and valve becoming projectiles 
which struck and severely injured a second technician. 

The  UK  HSE  investigation  found  the  company  had  failed  to  take  suitable  and  sufficient  steps  to  ensure  risks 
associated  with  the  handling  of  pressurised  cylinders  were  eliminated.    The  company  also  failed  to  remove 
pressurised cylinders which were not suitable for use in a safe and secure manner, and also failed to ensure the 
provision of appropriate information and instruction in respect of the handling and use of energised gas cylinders. 

Speaking  after  the  hearing,  the  HSE  inspector  said:  “This  incident  could  so  easily  have  been  avoided  by  simply 
carrying out correct control measures and safe working practices.” 

The full press release can be found on the HSE website. 

Members  may  wish  to  review  incidents  relating  to  failed  pillar  valves,  threads  and  other  failures  leading  to 
unplanned release of gas: 

  High potential near miss: failure of valve on gas bottle 

 

Injuries due to failure of diver’s emergency gas cylinder 

  Diver Injury during air cylinder recharging 
 

 

Serious Injury Caused by Energy Isolation Failure 

 
6 

What happened? 

A  yard  worker  was  cleaning  debris  from  underneath  a  hydraulic  pipe.  
Whilst  performing  this  task,  the  worker  placed  his  forearm  on  a 
hydraulically operated pipe stand.  This put the forearm in the line of fire 
between  a  lift  pocket  and  a  recently  modified  plate.    A  serious  injury 
occurred to the worker’s forearm when the pipe stand (see photograph) 
was  lowered  by  another  worker  operating  the  hydraulic  lowering 
mechanism.  

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  There  were  no  energy  isolation  routines  to  prevent  the  lowering 
operation  from  occurring  inappropriately,  though  this  was  covered 
and required by our members’ permit to work (PTW) system; 

  There  were  simultaneous  operations  (SIMOPS)  taking  place  and  these  presented  risks  which  had  not  been 

properly assessed; 

  There had been modification of this equipment and this had not been fully risk assessed; 

  The task plan was not detailed enough to define all of the hazards in the work area; 

  The injured person did not notice that his task placed him ‘in the line of fire’. 

What actions were taken?  What lessons were learned? 

  All activities require a risk assessment.  Where simultaneous operations have the potential to expose a person 
to  harm,  the  PTW  and  isolation  process  should  show  that  a  higher  level  of  control,  communication  and 
mitigation is in place; 

  Use  the  MoC  process  to ensure  that  modifications  to equipment  are  assessed  and  do  not  introduce  a  new 

hazard. 

Members may wish to refer to:  

  Fatal accident in connection with the operation of an A-frame based launch and recovery system (LARS) used 

for ROV operations [causal factor: failure of isolation] 

 

Inadvertent lowering of lifeboat [causal factor: failure to identify hazards] 

  Serious Finger Injury: Procedures During Engine Maintenance [injured person was in the line of fire] 

Line of fire (video) 

 

 

In the line of fire (IMCA SEL 036) (video) 

  Guidelines for Management of Change (IMCA SEL 001) 

