SAFETY FLASH 

July 2018 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 16/18 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 
 

1 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): Ankle Injuries During Loading Operations 

What happened? 

An experienced AB suffered serious ankle injuries during offloading operations.  A vessel was delivering drill pipe 
casings to a jack-up rig when he was hit by the casing bundle being discharged.  The casing involved in the incident 
was being lifted when it was observed that the Tag Line was entangled in the sling.  The crane operator lowered 
the casing to around 1m above the vessel deck.  The AB was instructed by the Duty Officer to untangle the tag line.  
Whilst  he  was  doing  this,  the  crane  operator  lowered  the  casing  bundle  without  warning,  causing  it  to  swing 
towards the AB.  He was struck by the casing bundle, lost balance and fell onto the adjacent casings lying on the 
deck.  The movement of the crane did not stop, and the casing bundle was lowered further, coming to rest partly 
on the AB’s legs and partly on other casings on the main deck.   

The Duty Officer immediately notified the crane operator to lift the casing and transfer it to a safe area.  The AB 
was carried from the main deck and shifted to the ships hospital for inspection and first aid.   

 

 

 

Our member noted the following: 

  The incident occurred in daylight, good weather and calm seas;  

  The AB was experienced, wearing full personal protective equipment (PPE) and was fresh on shift in the last 

hour and adequately rested; 

  The crane operator was approximately 35m above the vessel deck and had clear line of sight to the working 

  This incident occurred during the 13th lift of 29 loads.  12 bundles of casings had already been safely picked up 

by the rig using the same crane; 

  No inappropriate, unsafe or reckless use of crane by the operator was observed during these previous 12 lifts 

which might have warranted stoppage of operations. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes 

  There was a lack of situational awareness/risk perception/risk awareness on the part of the crane operator of 

  There was inadequate communication or transfer of information and intent from the rig crane operator to the 

area; 

the rig; 

vessel. 

Members may wish to review the following incidents: 

 

Incidents involving poor crane operations 

  High Potential Near Miss: slip on tag line during crane operations 

Members may also wish to refer to the following guidelines: 

  Guidelines for lifting operations (IMCA SEL 019) 

2 

Injured Finger during Cargo Operations 

What happened? 

During cargo operations, a crewman got his finger stuck between the cargo 
and the lifting chain.  The incident occurred when a vessel was discharging 
modules with a weight of 220 tonnes direct from the vessel to a trailer on the 
quay.  One hook of a chain tackle which was connected to the cargo, fell off.  
The other hook was  still connected to the  trailer.  When reconnecting the 
hook that fell off, a sudden movement of the module meant that one finger 
got stuck between the module and the chain.  When the module swung back 
the  crewmember  was  able  to  remove  his  hand.    His  finger  was  seriously 
damaged, and he had to be sent to hospital for X-ray and stitches.  He came 
back onboard some hours later. 

Our member noted: 

  The lifting was taking place at a relatively unsheltered location; there was 
some vessel movement from swell, but this was considered to be within 
acceptable limits; 

  The  crew  were  experienced  in  this  discharge  operation;  it  was  second 

time the ship was discharging in this port. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

  There had been a change of plan, for which there had been insufficient management of change (MoC).  The 
company  has  a  technique  for  use  in  exposed  harbours  where  swell  is  an  issue.    It  was  felt  that  there  was 

insufficient equipment available for that technique to be used safely, so the decision was made to land the 
cargo straight on the trailer, using chain tackles to reduce the horizontal motion; 

  No job hazard analysis or toolbox talk took place for the alternative lifting technique; this is considered to be 

the cause of the incident. 

What actions were taken? 

  New technique was to be developed for landing cargo in a swell port, based on tools/equipment the company 

used in another product group (cross learning). 

Members may wish to review the following incidents, both of which have management of change (MoC) as a casual 
factor: 

 

Line of fire LTI: Finger injury during lifting operations 

  Serious hand injury  

See also Guidelines For Management Of Change (IMCA SEL 001). 

3 

Finger Injury Caused by Falling Wire Wedge 

What happened? 

A crewman suffered a crushed finger during an operation to replace a winch wire 
on a large crane.  Two crew members were installing a wire wedge into the eye of 
the wire in order to prevent the wire coming loose from the winch drum.  They 
held  the  wedge  in  place  by  hand  whilst  other  crew  tightened  the  wire.  
Unfortunately, the wedge – which weighed 15kg – fell.  The crew were unable to 
support the weight of it and one person had his right hand crushed between the 
wedge and the deck.  He was taken to the on-board clinic immediately.  The on-
board doctor treated him for injuries to his forefinger and middle finger. 

What went wrong?  What were the causes? 

Our member noted the following: 

  There was no proper holding point on the wedge; 

  Workers’ gloves were contaminated by the wire grease during operation making them slippery; 

  When the wedge fell, one person attempted to hold or stop it’s fall, but failed due to the 15kg weight; 

  The operation was not conducted in the safest or easiest manner. 

 

 

 

What lessons were learned? 

A better technique would have been to rotate the drum until the wire eye was upward.  Then the wedge could be 
laid on the eye, and the wire tightened up until the wedge was suitably secured.  

Members  may wish to  review  the  following  incidents  (both  hand  injuries caused  by  unplanned  falling of  heavy 
objects during repair or maintenance): 

 

Lost Time Injury (LTI): finger injury whilst working in engine room  

  Finger injury during maintenance work – restricted work case  

4 

There’s Something in my Eye! 

What happened? 

After  shift,  a  member  of  the  crew  took  a  shower  and  felt  that  there  was 
something in his eye.  The next day he asked for help to remove it, but without 
success.    He  had  to  leave  the  vessel  at  the  next  port  to  have  the  debris 
removed.  

What went wrong? 

During the early part of the previous shift, this person had worked on deck wearing proper PPE and later in the 
shift, was working on the bridge.  During the day, the debris had settled in his hair and washed into his eyes during 
the shower. 

What lessons were learned? 

There was a lack of awareness of this mechanism of transmission of debris into the eyes.   

Be aware that debris can be still present after removal of all PPE, and of the risk of debris being transferred into the 
eyes from PPE or from the hair at a later time or when showering. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incidents: 

  Eye Injury: crewman got something in his eye when removing his PPE 

 

Loss of sight in right eye: misdiagnosis of illness 

