AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/10 

Safety Flash 

 September 2010 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Third Degree Burn Sustained During Rope Access Hot Work 

A member has reported an incident in which a rope access technician (RAT) suffered third-degree burns whilst engaged in 
hot work.  The injured person was engaged in rope accessed structural cutting activity using an oxy-acetylene torch on a 20 
inch pump caisson.  During the operation sparks and molten material were blown in the direction of the injured party, and a 
small piece of molten material was caught in the tongue and ankle protector of his left safety shoe, causing serious burns to 
the left foot.  The injured person was able to stop work, swiftly remove his safety shoe and safely descend to deck level using 
the rope access gear.  Following initial first aid, it was noted that the burn was more serious than could be treated onboard 
and arrangements were made for the injured person to receive further treatment in hospital ashore. 

 

  
 

 

 

Figure 1 - Area in which rope access  

hot work was taking place  

 

Figure 2 – Injured person’s safety   

 shoe showing burn damage 

The investigation revealed the following: 

The direct cause of the incident was failure to use the correct personal protective equipment (PPE).  Spat protectors were 
not readily available, partly due to inadequate organisation.  These offer flame retardant protection to part of the under leg, 
ankle and shoe.   

The root cause of the incident was inadequate procedures and standards of work.  

♦  Procedures - specific details of hazards and precautions were not implemented in procedures for rope access hot work 

activities; 

♦  Risk  assessment  -  a  full  risk  assessment  for  rope  access-based  hot  work  was  not  available  and  the  job  specific  risk 

assessment used did not reflect any job specific issues; 

♦  Permit to work (PTW) - the permit to work showed partially generic pre-setting on hazards and precautions with 

references to standard rather than specific job safety analysis (JSA); 

♦ 

Job safety analysis - a specific job safety analysis was not available at the time of the incident; 

♦  Toolbox talks (TBT) - the quality of toolbox talks was not sufficient and needed to be improved. 

 

♦ 

♦ 

Following the incident, the following actions were taken: 

♦  Arrangements were made to make spat protectors available as soon as possible; 

Investigated the use of more substantial protective equipment for persons doing hot work;  

♦  Arranged  for  all  appropriate  worksite  safety  documentation  (e.g.  PTW,  JSA  and  TBT  records)  to  be  available  with 

specific detailed job-related entries; 

Investigated further training for personnel engaged in hot work, particularly flame-cutting. 

2  LTI – Severed Tendon 

A  member  reports  an  incident  in  which  a  person  suffered  a  severed  tendon,  resulting  in  several  months  off  work.  An 
electrical cable with a thick rubber sheath was being prepared for termination during a mobilisation.  A pair of electrical side 
cutters was being used to cut back the rubber insulating material from the end of the cable being terminated.  When cutting, 
the side cutters were also being pushed into the cable to aid the cut.  After three successful cuts the side cutters slipped, 
stabbing the left hand that was holding the cable.  The stab caused a puncture wound to the injured person’s middle finger 
just above the first knuckle.   

It was clear immediately following the incident that on clenching the left hand the injured person’s finger did not move.  On 
further investigation at the hospital, it was confirmed that the injured person had a severed tendon.  Surgery was carried out 
to reconnect the tendon.  It was anticipated that the injured person would be off work for 2 – 3 months.  

Following investigation of the incident and its causes, our member noted the following: 

♦  The injury was caused by the incorrect use of sharp hand tools.  Although side cutters are often used when stripping 
back cable, their correct use is for cutting electrical cable or long thin items such as cable ties, at 90°.  Side cutters are 
not specifically designed to cut in the way that scissors do, which is the way they were being used in this incident;   

♦  The  task  was  considered  to  be  part  of  the  basic  skill  set  of  an  experienced  engineer  and  was  not  subject  to  risk 

assessment or toolbox talks. 

dexterity; 

♦  The  injured  person  was  not  wearing  gloves  when  carrying  out  this  task  since  gloves  would  have  restricted  manual 

♦  Cutting towards the body (left hand) meant that when the cutters slipped the hand was vulnerable to injury; 

♦  A safe cable stripping tool had not been considered and such a tool was not available onboard the vessel;  

♦  The use of side cutters had replaced the previous practice of using a Stanley knife for this task as a result of restrictions 

placed on the use of knives. 

Our member drew the following lessons from this incident: 

♦  Even tasks which are classed as part of the basic skill set of an individual should be reviewed occasionally to ensure good 

and safe practice and the use of the most appropriate tools; 

♦  Tools should only be used for the purpose for which they are designed; 

♦ 

If it is necessary to remove personal protective equipment (PPE) to carry out a task then that PPE is not appropriate to 
the task.  

Our member made the following recommendations and corrective actions: 

♦  Worksites were reviewed to ensure that the appropriate tools were being used; 

♦  There was a review of the use of protective gloves at the worksite to ensure they were appropriate for the tasks being 

carried out; 

♦  Personnel  were  reminded  and  encouraged  to  engage  in  personal  last  minute  risk  assessments  and  to  pause  before 
carrying out a task to ensure that they have all the correct tools and PPE and that it is safe to carry on and that nothing 
has changed.   

 

 

 

3  Minor Chest Burns Suffered by Rope Access Technician 

A member has reported an incident in which a rope access technician suffered minor spot burns on the chest during cutting 
operations.  A 24 inch pipe approximately 4 metres above the deck was being cut by the rope access technician (RAT), who 
was suspended by rope access gear and also standing on a ladder.  The first cut and the access hole for a shackle, using a 
standard  cutting  torch,  went  smoothly.    The  internal  pipe  was  covered  with  a  4  centimetre  thick  rust  layer.    When  the 
second cut was nearly completed, some melted particles of rust fell onto the tip of the cutting torch.  One of the particles 
from  the  tip  of  the  cutting  torch  was  blown  away  and  somehow  entered  into/below  the  RAT’s  protective  clothing.    The 
technician felt some very light pain on his chest and continued to work.  After shift the technician felt some minor irritation 
on his chest and sought first aid.  Three small burns on the middle of his chest were treated/covered by one plaster.  

Investigation revealed the following: 

♦  The direct cause of the incident was molten particles entering through an opening between the buttons of a fully closed 

leather protective jacket.  This personal protective equipment (PPE) was not giving full body protection. 

It was suggested the following long-term corrective actions: 

♦  Protective jackets used for hot work should close using “velcro” closing straps rather than buttons; 

♦  Consideration  should  be  given  to  different  kinds  of  protective  clothing,  including  flexible  fireproof  hoods  designed  to 

cover shoulder, chest and neck area;  

♦ 

It should be emphasised at toolbox talks and in preparation for hot work that molten particles can enter PPE through 
the smallest openings. 

 

Figure 1- Protective clothing for rope access technicians showing small 

opening through which hot particle passed 

 

4  Near Miss: Safety Device (Hard Link) Damaged During Hot Work 

A member has reported an incident in which a rope access technician (RAT) damaged his safety equipment during hot work.  
The technician was gouging out the weld connection around 8 metres above deck. He was working next to his two climbing 
ropes and was also secured with a hard link.  This hard link was connected to the D-link of the technician’s harness and to a 
secure point above the technician.  

At the moment the RAT opened the air flow to start gouging, water streamed out of the nozzle instead of air.  This resulted 
in  the  technician  instinctively  pulling  back  the  gouging  torch.    During  this  uncontrolled  movement,  the  gouging  torch 
connected with the stop descender - a steel part of the technician’s climbing gear.  Since the technician was connected using 
a hard metal link to a beam on the platform, the technician’s metal climbing equipment made an electrical circuit to earth and 
current flowed from the gouging torch.  As a result, three of the six strands of the hard link were burnt through. 

 

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The RAT descended safely to the walkway 8 meters below to check and replace the damaged equipment and subsequently 
was able to safely resume work.  There were no injuries.  

Following investigation, the following was suggested: 

♦  Replace metal hard-link with a non-conductive nylon climber’s sling; 

♦  Ensure water is drained out of air supply before use with gouging torch. 

 
Figure 1 - Typical metal ‘hard-link’ for rope access technicians 

5  Tug Capsized During Operations  

A member reports an incident in which a tug girted and capsized during towing operations.  A third-party contractor’s tug 
was acting as a stern tug for a heavily laden barge arriving in port.  The master of the stern tug chose to deploy the towline 
over the stern of his vessel, and intended to maintain position and heading relative to the barge by using the tug’s engines.  A 
bridle (Gob) wire was not rigged.  As the lead tug increased speed, the master of the stern tug found that he was unable to 
effectively  control  the  yawing  of  his  tug,  and  five  minutes  after  connecting  to  the  barge,  the  vessel  took  a  large  sheer  to 
starboard, girted and capsized.  The crew escaped without injury.  
 

 

 

Towing tug 

Tug 

Barge with rocks 

Figure 1- Diagram of the Towing arrangement 

 

Our member conducted an investigation and noted the following: 

♦  For  a  conventional  tug,  towing  over  the  stern,  particularly  while  running  astern,  is  an  inherently  unstable  mode  of 

operation; 

♦  The towing speed was too high in this instance; 

♦  The lack of a bridle wire or “gob rope” meant there was no physical safety device to prevent the tug from girting when 

directional control was lost; 

♦  The  tug’s  master  had  not  been  trained  in  the  use  of  the  emergency  brake  release,  had  not  tested  it  or  witnessed  its 

effect, and could not operate it from the bridge when the tug got into difficulties; 

♦  There had been no prior toolbox talk or discussion between the pilot and the tug masters regarding the entry of the 
barge into the port, and the pilot was unaware of the intended towing method or operational limitations of the stern tug; 

♦  Crew were working an 18 hour “changeover” period in breach of the relevant working time regulations; 

♦  The  tug  masters’  knowledge  and  experience  were  never  assessed  by  the  third-party  owner,  and  there  was  no  formal 

staff training program. 

 

Our member drew the following lessons: 

♦  There should be prior discussion of scope of work between project manager and vessel owners, and between masters 

and pilots, to ensure suitability of vessels and crews, and full understanding of the task at hand; 

♦  Clear instructions on operational procedures should be provided to all personnel involved in operations;  

♦  Risk assessments and toolbox talks involving all relevant parties should be carried out prior to all towing operations;  

♦  Personnel should be familiar with emergency brake release systems on tugs and test it or witness its effect; 

♦  There should be appropriate implementation and understanding of working time regulations; 

♦  Towing over the stern: 

– 

Speed should be kept at an appropriate minimum, not more than 3 knots, when a tug with conventional propulsion 
(single or double) is acting as a stern (steering) boat;  

–  Captains of towed vessels should remain aware of using the propulsion, and the combination of forces acting on the 

hull; 

–  The use of a shot string (standard on single propulsion, advisable on double propulsion vessels) helps to keep the 
towing wire on the aft ship centrally positioned and avoids girting, the towing point being brought to the aft of the 
ship instead of on the pivot point of the tug. See example in Fig. 2. 
 

Figure 2 - illustration of ideal towing arrangement 

 

6  Load Dropped Owing to Incorrect Manufacture of “Flemish Eye” Crane Pennant 

The UK Health & Safety Executive (UK HSE) has published the attached safety flash regarding the dropping of a 9.5 tonne 
load  on  an  offshore  installation  as  a  result  of  the  incorrect  manufacture  of  a  15  tonne  Flemish  eye  crane  pennant.  The 
information can also be found at www.hse.gov.uk/safetybulletins/flemish-eye-crane-pennant.htm  

 

 

 

Safety Flash 

 

