AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 08/04 

Safety Flash 

August 2004 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

Keywords:  Mask 

1  Diving Helmets – Damage to Emergency Valve 

IMCA  has  received  the  attached  Caution  Bulletin  (number  1  of  2004)  issued  by  Kirby  Morgan  Dive  Systems  relating  to 
possible  damage  to  emergency  valve  main  body  between  male  pipe  threads  and  the  ‘B’  side  block  body’s,  as  well  as  the 
manifold block body at the mating female pipe threads. 

This  alert, 
www.kirbymorgan.com/safety.html  

together  with  other  safety-related 

information, 

is  also  available  on 

the  company’s  website  at 

2  Disguised Transportable Gas Cylinders 

Keywords:  Gas 

IMCA  has  been  passed  a  copy  of  the  attached  safety  alert  issued  by  the  European  Industrial  Gases  Association  (EIGA).  
A number  of  recent  incidents  have  been  reported  in  various  locations  around  the  world  where  gas  cylinders  have  been 
tampered  with  and  deliberately  disguised.    A  number  of  these  have  been  where  acetylene  cylinders  have  been  marked  as 
oxygen cylinders, including replacement of the cylinder valve.  The EIGA alert sets out a number of ways of spotting modified 
cylinders, which should be brought to the attention of anyone dealing with them. 

I R B Y MORGA

N

K

D

I

V

ESYST E M S ,

I n c.

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, INC.

425 Garden Street

Santa Barbara, California  93101

Telephone (805) 965-8538   Fax (805) 966-5761
Email info@KMDSI.com  Web www.KMDSI.com

Caution Bulletin

Number 1 of 2004

JULY 28, 2004

Subject: Possible damage to emergency valve main body (550-140) between male pipe
     threads and the "B" side block body's (550-029) as well as the manifold block
    body (350-050) at the mating female pipe threads.

Products Affected: Any Kirby Morgan helmets or masks incorporating a side block or

 manifold block, or separate manifold block assembly

An incident has occurred where an emergency valve assembly, 505-070, had cracked causing an
air leak, then upon inspection, broken off from the side block assembly, ( 505-024 ) on a KMB 18 mask.
Extensive tests have been performed by KMDSI, to try and determine what if anything during assembly
or manufacture, may have led to this happening. Also, metallurgical analysis has been performed to
determine if the proper material was used based on the material certification on file. Nothing in the testing
points to anything obvious being wrong  either before or after testing. The material analysis performed,
provided a match with what is stated on the material certificates of Conformance

In looking into the fit of the mating parts taken from inventory, the parts  as brass "RAW"
condition were consistent with the fit and function requirements of KMDSI as well as other referenced
industrial standards. However, some Variations were found between the parts that were chrome plated.
This extra plating may lead to misalignment of the parts when using KMDSI recommended procedures,
and possibly cause an overstress condition while trying to tighten far enough to obtain proper valve handle
alignment.

The emergency valve body assembly (505-070) must be indexed (clocked) enough to allow
access to the control knob for proper use of the valve. If there is excess plating between the side block/
manifold block body pipe threads, and the emergency valve body pipe threads, this may cause the end
user, during any scheduled maintenance,to go beyond normal procedure in tightening these threads.
Overstressing  and  weakening  the  parts  may  result.  Make  certain  to  carefully  follow  recommended
procedures in the KMDSI operations and maintenance manuals. If excess chrome interference is found,
it is acceptable to have  the control knob slightly misaligned to keep from applying too much force to the
valve body, as long as the user can reach the emergency valve.

Recommended Procedure:

 Before installing any pipe sealant, check the fit of the valve assembly pipe threads to the mating
threads of the side block. There should be 2 turns of hand make up before  needing to use a wrench. If
there is less make up, then the threads will need to be chased with a 1/4” NPT tap to obtain the proper
make up , If tapping is required, the bent tube assembly, the one way Valve assembly and steady flow
components must all be removed and the side block body must be thoroughly cleaned to remove any loose
particles. Remove the valve assembly from hand tight.

Doc #020909001

  ©Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc All Rights Reserved.

Page 1 of 2

I R B Y MORGA

N

K

D

I

V

ESYST E M S ,

I n c.

Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, INC.

425 Garden Street

Santa Barbara, California  93101

Telephone (805) 965-8538   Fax (805) 966-5761
Email info@KMDSI.com  Web www.KMDSI.com

Caution Bulletin

Number 1 of 2004

JULY 28, 2004

Subject: Possible damage to emergency valve main body (550-140) between male pipe
     threads and the "B" side block body's (550-029) as well as the manifold block
    body (350-050) at the mating female pipe threads.

Products Affected: Any Kirby Morgan helmets or masks incorporating a side block or

 manifold block, or separate manifold block assembly

Recommended Procedure Continued:

Before installing the valve assembly, wrap the pipe threads with  1-1/2  turns of teflon tape starting after
the first thread. The amount of tape used should be based on what is found in the fit check . Apply the tape with
slight tension to allow the tape to fill into the threads. If another type of sealant is used, it must be oxygen
compatible as well as not pose any health  hazard to the diver. Hand tighten the valve, then continue an additional
1-1/2 to 2 turns with a wrench keeping in mind the proper alignment of the control knob to the side block. Also,
there should be at least one male thread visible. Check to be certain the valve is tight by trying to loosen the fit
by hand. DO NOT TIGHTEN THE VALVE BODY TIGHTER THAN NECESSARY!!! OVER TIGHT-
ENING MAY OVERSTRESS THE PART AND CAUSE  THE PART TO FAIL.

If there are any questions please call or Email KMDSI

Doc #020909001

  ©Kirby Morgan Dive Systems, Inc All Rights Reserved.

Page 2 of 2

      SAFETY ALERT 

Safety Alert SA-05 –  June 2004 

 
 
 

 

Disguised transportable gas cylinders 

 
 
 
Gas companies around the world and their customers operate in excess of 200 million high 
pressure  gas  cylinders.  The  high  level  of  safety  during  use  and  transportation  of  these  gas 
cylinders  is  shown  by  the  very  low  level  of  incidents  caused  by  failures  of  gas  cylinders  or 
associated safety devices which sometimes is followed with the release of gas. To support this 
high level of safety are a number of European and International standards for the design, retest, 
filling checks and handling of gas cylinders. One of the most important operating standards is 
that any modification to a gas cylinder e.g. repair, change of service or stamp markings is only 
permitted by authorized experts who ensure that the relevant standards are followed to ensure 
the continued safe service of gas cylinders.   
 
An unauthorised change of a stamp markings of a cylinder e.g. re-test data, gas type or 
filling pressure, the changing of the required colour coding and labelling or the intentional 
damaging  of  a  gas  cylinder  is  a  criminal  act.  This  is  because  the  health,  safety  and 
potentially the life of employees in filling stations and third party persons are endangered.  
 
From  time  to  time  cylinders  with  modified  markings  or  similar  are  reported  to  EIGA.  As  a 
reminder, EIGA urgently recommends that its members ensure that all persons involved with the 
inspection of cylinders before filling operations or with gas cylinder retest shall be sufficiently 
trained to detect Cylinders with unauthorised markings or those that may have been damaged. 
 
The following details can be indicators of unauthorised modifications  
 
•  Are  there  any  contradictions  between  the  cylinder  valve  type,  the  colour  coding, 

precautionary label and the identification of the gas (stamp-markings, label)? 

•  Are there any signs of modification of the cylinder marks, e.g. missing marks, unusual or 

wrong letters? 

•  Are there any signs of modification of the cylinder, e.g. strange colour coding or mechanical 

treatment (grinding or welding work)? 

•  Are there any signs of modification of the cylinder valve or its cap, e.g. loosened screws, 

missing components (gland nut, locking pin, burst disk, new or different cap)? 

• 

Is the indication of the gas (stamp marks, colour, gas name etc) unusual? 

 

 

1 

 EIGA 2004 - EIGA grants permission to reproduce this publication provided the Association is acknowledged as the source 
 
EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL GASES ASSOCIATION 
AVENUE DES ARTS 3 – 5 (cid:140) B-1210 BRUSSELS 
PHONE +32 2 217 70 98 (cid:140) FAX + 32 2 219 85 14 (cid:140) E-mail : info@eiga.org  -  www.eiga.org 

Safety Alert SA-05 –  June 2004 

Is the weight of the cylinder unusual for the type of gas? 

Is the size (volume, diameter, length) or design of the cylinder unusual? 

•  Are privately (customer) owned cylinders presented with a brand-new or partly new coating, 

which was not applied at the filling plant where it is to be filled? 

 
If one or more of the above mentioned should be answered with yes, a hammer test can give support. If 
the cylinder emits a dull sound, it could be an indication of that the cylinder has been modified. This is not 
applicable to acetylene cylinders and to aluminium cylinders. 
 
 
Cylinders  having  one  or  more  of  the  above  defects  or  are  suspected  to  have  been 
modified shall be set aside for additional control measures. 
 

« If in doubt, ask your supervisor » 

 
 
The following examples show the importance of a sufficiently cylinder control before filling. All 
samples have been identified by the pre-filling checks: 
 
•  Conversion of an acetylene cylinder to a 150 bar oxygen cylinder (picture 1). 

•  Conversion of an acetylene cylinder to Argon mixture gas cylinder (picture 2). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

 
 
 

Picture 
 

 

 

Picture 2 

 

 
 

 

• 

• 

 

 
 

2

EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL GASES ASSOCIATION 
AVENUE DES ARTS 3 – 5 (cid:140) B-1210 BRUSSELS 
PHONE +32 2 217 70 98 (cid:140) FAX + 32 2 219 85 14 (cid:140) E-mail : info@eiga.org  -  www.eiga.org 

 
 

 

Safety Alert SA-05 –  June 2004 

•  A cylinder used by a smuggler (picture 3). 

•  A high pressure cylinder with a welded plug in the shell (picture 4). 

•  A cylinder with a falsified shoulder marking (picture 5). 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Picture 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Picture 4 

 

 

 

Picture 5 

 

Disclaimer 

 

All technical publications of EIGA or under EIGA’s name, including Codes of practice, Safety procedures and any other technical information 

contained in such publications were obtained from sources believed to be reliable and are based on technical information and experience 

currently available from members of EIGA and others at the date of their issuance. 

While EIGA recommends reference to or use of its publications by its members, such reference to or use of EIGA’s publications by its 
members or third parties are purely voluntary and not binding. Therefore, EIGA or its members make no guarantee of the results and 

assume no liability or responsibility in connection with the reference to or use of information or suggestions contained in EIGA’s publications. 
EIGA has no control whatsoever as regards, performance or non performance, misinterpretation, proper or improper use of any information 

or suggestions contained in EIGA’s publications by any person or entity (including EIGA members) and EIGA expressly disclaims any 

liability in connection thereto.EIGA’s publications are subject to periodic review and users are cautioned to obtain the latest edition. 

3

EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL GASES ASSOCIATION 
AVENUE DES ARTS 3 – 5 (cid:140) B-1210 BRUSSELS 
PHONE +32 2 217 70 98 (cid:140) FAX + 32 2 219 85 14 (cid:140) E-mail : info@eiga.org  -  www.eiga.org 

 
 

