AB

 

 

1  Tagline Incident 

IMCA Safety Flash 06/03 

July 2003 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

A member has reported an incident whereby an injury was sustained by a person during lifting operations on a construction 
ship. 

A person was acting as banksman, but also assisted with the handling the load, weighing approximately 1256kg, which was 
being moved from the starboard aft side of the ship to its moon-pool area.  The load had taglines attached to control the 
load as it was being lifted over ROV system containers. 

To help steady the load, the acting banksman wrapped a tagline around a handrail, but his fingers became trapped when the 
load  swung  and  the  tagline  became  taut.    As  a  result,  a  part  of  the  person’s  left  finger  was  amputated  and  he  sustained 
superficial rope burns to two other fingers. 

The company involved has noted the following as ‘lessons learnt’: 

  The  banksman  was  also  controlling  the  tag  line.    This  combination  of  roles  is  thought  to  have  resulted  in  loss  of 

attention; 

  The practice of using tag lines needs to take into account of dynamic forces when controlling movement of the load; 

  The practice of taking a wrap around the tag line makes it difficult to release in a critical situation. 

The company’s instructions for lifting equipment and lifting operations were revised shortly after the event.  The two key 
additions were: 

  An statement instruction that the banksman is to be solely dedicated to instructing the lifting operation and should not 

take part in any additional duties; 

  A new section ‘Use of Taglines’ describing the consideration of safe positioning, dynamic forces of loads, securing taglines 

and a warning to never wrap a tagline around any body part for controlling the load. 

2 

Inflatable Lifejackets Fail to Inflate 

Keywords:  Gas 

This safety alert was received from the UK Maritime & Coastguard Agency (MCA) 

“Recently a fisherman and a workboat crewman died when the inflatable lifejackets they were wearing failed to inflate.  We suspect 
that the gas cylinders may have worked loose since the lifejackets were last inspected. 

Manufacturers  provide instructions and maintenance procedures for inflatable lifejackets which include  details of regular and routine 
inspections. 

The following key learning points have been noted: 

  Owners of inflatable lifejackets should have them serviced and inspected in accordance with the manufactures’ instruction; 

  Owners should include the service and maintenance of inflatable lifejackets within their safety management system; 

  Users of inflatable lifejackets should be instructed in their use; 

  Owners should maintain a record of serving, inspection and the training of users of inflatable lifejackets; 

 

  Users of inflatable lifejackets should inspect them before putting them on.  Inspection should include: 

– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 

Inspection of straps, buckles and outer covers; 
Inspection of Safety harness, its stitching an buckles;  
 Inspection of the inflatable lung for abrasion damage; 
 Inspection of gas inflation cylinder for signs of corrosion; 
 Inspection of the gas inflation for tightness of connection to the inflation mechanism; and 
 Inspection of the automatic inflation system, if fitted.” 

3  SARS  

Keywords:  Infection 

In  respect  of  Severe  Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome  (SARS)  members  are  able  to  obtain  advice  from  several  international/ 
governmental agencies around the world.  For example: 

World Health Organisation:  http://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/ 

US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):  http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars/  

4  Positioning of Emergency Positioning Indicating Radio Beacon 

Keywords:  Dropped 

IMCA recently received details of an incident involving a dropped object. 

A vessel was undergoing a port state inspection in conjunction with a radio surveyor.  During the inspection of the EPRIB 
(Electronic  Positioning  Indicator  Radio  Beacon),  it  was  noted  that  it  was  a  type  that  had  to  be  removed  from  the  holding 
bracket.  The bracket was a spring clip type with a designated amount of tension that was mounted on the outside handrail 
on the monkey island.  When the surveyor unclipped the EPRIB, the spring tension of the bracket forced it out of his grip 
resulting  in  the  unit  falling  to  the  main  deck  below  (approximately  50  feet).    This  could  have  resulted  in  major  injury  to 
personnel. 

The recommendation made by the party concerned to members was to carry out a swift review of the position of EPRIBs on 
board their vessels and to move the holding brackets to a safer location if necessary. 

5  Mugging and Robbery  

Keywords:  Robbery 

Further to a Safety Flash 05/03 a further robbery report has been received from a member. 

While  getting  a  ride  back  to  the  vessel  from  Trinidad,  Port  of  Spain,  an  employee  was  mugged  and  robbed  at  gunpoint.  
He was offered a ride back to the boat by a seemingly friendly man and his three friends.  Approximately ten minutes after 
being in the vehicle the man in the seat next to him produced a gun and began to empty the employee’s pockets.  His visa 
card and the money he had on him were taken.  He was then severely beaten when the PIN number to his Visa card would 
not work.  The men decided to keep him prisoner to try to get more money out of the next day.  When he mentioned that 
he would be missed at the vessel and the card would be blocked, they drove to a remote location outside of town to kill him.  
The  gunman’s  mobile  phone  rang  and  during  this  distraction  the  employee  dived  down  a  slope  while  being  fired  upon.  
The men than decided to leave him there.  About two hours later he decided it was safe to come out and make his way to 
the vessel. 

The company involved has issued the following advice to its employees: 

  Do no accept rides from anyone other than official taxi drivers; 

  Always use the buddy system when going ashore, never go alone; 

  Take extreme caution when ashore; be aware of your surroundings and the people in your surroundings. 

Safety Flash 

6  Fatality – Injury from an Air Hose 

Keywords:  Hoses 

A  member  has  reported  that  it  is  aware  of  the  following  incident,  whereby  a  worker  was  struck  on  the  head  by  a 
compressed air hose which had blown off of its fitting on a piece of equipment.  He received serious head injuries, which 
proved fatal. 

The air hose had been held by a hose clamp on the fitting, with no keeper, restraining chain or sling to prevent the hose from 
thrashing  around  and  this  failure  to  properly  secure  the  hose  and  hose  clamp  was  identified  as  the  primary  cause  of  the 
incident. 

This had been a ‘routine’ task and didn’t require a formal written job safety analysis to be carried out. 

However,  the  company  has  highlighted  the  destructive  potential  of  unrestrained  compressed  air  hoses  to  all  personnel 
through toolbox talks and safety training. 

It  has  expressed  the  need  for  keepers,  chains,  slings,  special  proprietary  couplings  and  whip-checks  to  be  installed  on  all 
diameter or high-pressure compressed air hoses, in order to prevent them thrashing about in the event of a hose or coupling 
failure (see figure).  The company has undertaken to perform regular inspections of all compressed-air-powered equipment, 
including hoses, in order to assess the integrity of couplings, clamps, keepers and hoses and to allow corrective action to be 
taken. 

 

 

 

 

