AB

 

IMCA Safety Flash 07/04 

August 2004 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learned  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which  may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.    Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Exhaust Valve Cage Assembly Blow-Out 

Keywords: Near Miss   

 

 

 

 

 

 

A member has reported the following serious incident which occurred aboard one of its vessels.  It has been categorised by 
the company as ‘near miss fatality’ – fortunately the only damage sustained was to equipment.  The aft exhaust valve cage 
assembly from one of the units blew out of the engine, damaging the rocker arm assembly and destroying the rocker cover. 

The assembly struck the lifting beam above the main engine and was deflected directly aft over the turbo-charger, narrowly 
missing the duty engineer, who had been inspecting a tappet knocking noise at a nearby cylinder head.  The assembly landed 
on the bottom plates near CPP pumps. 

Jacket cooling water was gushing out of the cylinder head of the damaged unit, restricting direct access to the main engine 
controls.    The  duty  engineer  ran  from  the  engine  room  to  the  engine  control  room  and  informed  the  bridge  to  use  the 
emergency stop to shut down the main engine.  The main engine was stopped within twenty seconds. 

The  damage  was  summarised  as  follows  (see  pictures  below,  which  show  the  position  of  the  engineer  at  the  time  of  the 
incident): 

the exhaust valve cage assembly was blown out of the cylinder head, shearing one holding-down stud and stripping the 
thread out of the nut of the second holding-down stud; 

the rocker arm assembly was damaged beyond repair; 

the rocker cover was destroyed; 

the rocker gear bridge piece casting had a section of the holding-down base broken off and was beyond repair; 

the lifting beam gantry above the main engine had a significant dent; 

the alarm light and fluorescent light above the main engine were destroyed. 

The  immediate  assumption  was  that  the  unit  had  hydraulically  locked  due  to  ingress  of  water  into  the  cylinder  liner  and 
preparations were started to remove the unit for inspection and repair. 

The company’s subsequent investigation established that the incident could be directly attributed to sea water entering the 
combustion space of the unit via the scavenge air system, hydraulically locking the engine cylinder, due to the failure of a sea 
water cooling tube on the charge air cooler, the failure of the scavenge air/water drains and the failure to check the drains’ 
condition during normal watchkeeping rounds. 

The  exact  time  of  the  failure  of  the  sea  water  cooling  could not  be  ascertained, but it is  believed  that it  could have  been 
leaking  over  a  period  of  time.    The  company  is  of  the  opinion  that  a  slug  of  water  had  been  trapped  behind  the  built-up 
sludge at the charge air cooler.  This slug of water/sludge travelled along the charge air manifold, blocking the drain cocks and 
entered the cylinder. 

The volume of water entering the cylinder was greater than what could have been consumed in the combustion cycle.  The 
quantity of water would have been minimal, as there was only 0.2mm bump clearance from the piston crown to the cylinder 
head.  A full hydraulic lock with complete flooding of the unit did not occur, as in such a case greater damage to the piston, 
connecting rod and crankshaft would have resulted. 

The  second  engineer  was  in  attendance,  investigating  an  unusual  noise  coming  from  another  unit  as  part  of  his  normal 
watchkeeping duties.  The failure occurred before the analysis of that problem had been completed. 

Safety Flash 

 

 

 

Clockwise from top left: 

Location of impact above cylinder; 

Rocker cover fragments; 

Position of engineer when incident happened 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The company has instigated the following preventative actions as a result: 

  removal of current scavenge air drain cocks and replacement with ball valves with a bigger bore; 

fitting of drain cock clearing devices at each drain cock; 

further development of previous engine room rounds check sheet to provide regular and accurate inspection of plant 
and equipment against specific performance criteria; 

  more thorough checking during watchkeeping rounds in accordance with engine room practice. 

While not directly related, it has also recommended the following: 

  updating of engine room procedures; 

  seeking to establish, as much as possible, more continuity of engine room crew; 

  providing earlier, longer and more detailed familiarisation for engine room crew not familiar with/new to a vessel; 

  developing  a  written  procedure  to  show  requirements  and  expectations  for  situations  where  the  whole  engine  room 

crew is new to the vessel, which should clearly explain: 
– 
– 
– 
– 

the maintenance system onboard the vessel; 
the method of storing maintenance records; 
the style of watchkeeping and parameter recording required and the supply of suitable logbooks for this purpose; 
handover procedures between chief engineers, to ensure that required knowledge is passed on. 

