Safety Flash 

October 2017 

IMCA Safety Flash 25/17 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to info@imca-int.com 

Any actions, lessons learnt, recommendations and suggestions in IMCA safety  flashes are generated by the submitting organisation.  IMCA safety flashes 
provide, in good faith, safety information for the benefit of members and do not necessarily constitute IMCA guidance, nor represent the official view of the 
Association or its members. 

 

What happened 

1 

Fatality: Crew Member Crushed Between TMS and Snubber Ring 

During a maintenance operation, a member of an ROV crew sustained fatal injuries when he was trapped between 
the top of the tether management system (TMS) and the snubber ring. 

What went wrong/causes 

It  should  be  noted  that  this  incident  remains 
under investigation. Additional information will 
be provided in due course. 

Lessons learnt/actions taken 

  Maintenance  activities  should  be  properly 
in 

risk 
undertaken 
accordance with company procedures; 

assessed 

and 

  Maintenance  activities  often 

introduce 
additional  hazards 
into  the  workplace; 
these should be fully understood, assessed 
and managed; 

instruction; 

Snubber ring 

Maintenance 
operations 

 

 

TMS 

  There  should  be  a  documented  safe  system  of  work,  for  example,  a  maintenance  manual  and/or  work 

 

If  activation  of  the  equipment  is  necessary  to  complete  the  maintenance  activity,  for  example  for  testing 
purposes, extreme care needs to be taken which includes removing all personnel from any danger zone; 

  Avoid undertaking a maintenance activity under a load or between a load and fixed point; 

  Equipment must be turned off and isolated when being worked on. 

The incident highlights the need for strict compliance with the ‘golden’ or ‘life-saving’ rules used by all contractors 
and clients. 

Members may wish to refer to the following incident: 

  Fatal accident in connection with the operation of an A-frame based launch and recovery system (LARS) used 
for ROV operations [“The combination of technical and human error had resulted in an unfortunate breach of 
barriers causing the fatality”]. 

 

 

