AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 18/13 

Safety Flash 

 December 2013 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Fatality During Lifting Operations 

A member has reported an incident in which a crew member suffered fatal crush injuries. This was during lifting operations, 
on an offshore vessel. The incident occurred whilst rigging equipment was being transferred from one part of the vessel to 
the  spar  deck.  This  operation  was  conducted  by  the  crane  operator  and  rigger  team.  One  of  the  loads  to  be  transferred 
involved a  Dyneema  sling  arrangement that was connected to an ROV reverse hook.  The sling weighed approximately 0.7 
tonne and the hook 2.3 tonne, giving a combined weight of 3.0 tonne. The rigging assembly was prepared on the main deck 
by the lead rigger and a rigger. 

The rigger foreman, senior rigger (IP) and the certified rigger were located on the spar deck. They had already received and 
sea-fastened the spreader beam and were awaiting the next load to arrive. As the Heavy Lift Crane boom was located in its 
rest,  the  Manitowoc  crane  boom  could  not  be  positioned  to  allow  a  plumb  lowering  of  the  load  onto  the  spar  deck.  The 
senior rigger (IP) was asked to move to a safe position by the rigger foreman.  

After confirmation was given to send the load it arrived suddenly at the spar deck; it landed inboard against the spreader. It 
then slid forward towards the senior rigger, who was struck twice by the suspended load. Due to his height the load made 
contact with his chest and crushed him against the cargo rail, at his back.  

The alarm was raised and a  response activated. The vessel doctor found no vital signs, he applied an  airway, gave  oxygen, 
fitted a cannula and administered adrenaline to the senior rigger but there was no response. Resuscitation continued but was 
unsuccessful and the senior rigger was declared dead. 

Position of riggers on the spar deck 

Dyneema sling and ROV reverse hook 

 

 

 

 

♦  The senior rigger may have felt he was already in a safe position, between the end of the spreader bar and the stern of 

Illustration of load movement towards injured person 

 

Our member’s early investigation notes the following: 

♦ 

Incident occurred in daylight hours; 

♦  Wind was 20-22 knots ESE; 

♦  Significant wave height 2.7m, with maximum wave height of 3.1m; 

the zodiac, not anticipated he was actually at risk; 

♦  The slide forwards of the heavy load may have been caused by: 

Induced momentum from crane swing 

− 
−  Contact with the parking leg of the spreader beam 
−  Contact with the lifting eye, nubbins of spreader beam 
− 
−  Vessel motion from sea state; 

Induced spin from offset of centre of gravity 

♦  Or any combination of the above factors. 

Our member reiterates the following vital points with regards to all lifting operations: 

♦  Careful consideration should be given to all lifting operations. All lifts require planning whether they are routine or non-

♦  Careful consideration should be given to the positioning of personnel – particularly riggers and banksmen, during lifting 

routine;  

operations; 

♦  Members may also wish to refer to IMCA SEL 019 Guidelines for lifting operations. 

2  Serious Working at Height Incidents 

A member has reported  a number of serious working at height incidents, resulting in a fatality  and five Lost Time Injuries 
(LTIs). The member would like to raise awareness of the risks associated with working with heights.  

Incident 1 - LTI 

An employee of a sub-contractor slipped and fell 15m resulting in a brain haemorrhage and leg fracture. 

 

The  injured  person  and  co-
worker  location  with  a  fall 
distance of 15m. 

 

Roof  sheets  stacked  on  top  of 
one another 

 

 

Showing work area from which person fell 

Incident 2 - LTI 

The  injured  person  stood  on  a  cardboard  box  to  access  the  racking  shelves  in  the  storage  area,  of  an  onshore  yard. 
Consequently, the injured person fell from the box and suffered a broken wrist and fractured elbow. 

Internal storage area at onshore site 

 

Incident 3 - LTI in Shipyard 

The  injured  person  was  attempting  to  transit  an  unsecured  walkway  and  fell  a  distance  of  1.7m.  The  person  fell  onto  the 
scaffold structure below; the fall resulted in four broken ribs. 

Showing from where and how injured person fell 

 

 
Incident 4  – LTI on Offshore Vessel 

In the fourth incident, a deck hand slipped and fell down a ladder leading from the deck to the paint store. He was found at 
the foot of the ladder in pain and unable to move, subsequently he required a medevac. 

Incident  5 – Fall on the same level: LTI on Offshore Vessel 

The injured person stepped down onto exposed hose-work from the ROV launch and recovery system (LARS). The person 
skidded onto the deck and slipped. The impact resulted in two minor fractures to the bones in right arm. 

Incident 6 – Fall from Height Fatality 

 Showing worksite where injury occurred  

Whilst  installing  a  ventilation  system  an  employee  of  a  sub-contractor,  fell  from  the  roof  of  a  building.  The  person  fell 
approximately 22m and died as a result. The employee was equipped with a safety harness; neither of the two lanyards had 
been attached to the adjacent life-lines.    

Height from ground: 22m 

 

Showing the hole through which person fell and  the distance to ground 

Our member summarised that irrespective of the height, the potential consequence of a fall can be extremely severe and the 
above cases are clear evidence of this. A fall from a height is entirely avoidable if procedures are followed, risk assessments 
and tool box talks are conducted also suitable and sufficient mitigation is in place. 

 

 

 
Our member recommended the following: 

♦ 

Implement  the  conditions  of  the  Permit  to  Work,  consider  operations  which  may  be  undertaken  concurrently  with 
others; 

♦  Members’  attention  is  also  drawn  to  the  wide  range  of  IMCA  safety  promotional  materials,  which  will  be  of  use  in 

♦  Ensure personnel are suitably qualified and experienced; 

♦  Provide adequate supervision; 

♦  Use appropriate working at height equipment and tooling; 

♦  Conduct a toolbox talk; 

♦ 

If in doubt ‘stop the job’ and re-assess; 

Safety Pocket card SPC 10 Workplace safety self-assessment 

mitigating risks of this sort, including: 

Safety Pocket card SPC 02 Preventing Slips & Trips 

Safety Pocket card SPC 06 Working at height 

Safety Pocket card SPC 18 Permit to Work 

Safety Pocket card SPC 03 Tool Box Talks 

− 
− 
− 
− 
− 
− 
− 
−  DVD SEL 009 Working at height  
−  DVD SEL 013 Slips, trips and finger nips 
−  DVD SEL 021 Risk assessment 
−  DVD SEL 026 Toolbox talks 

Safety Poster SPP 03 Working at height 

Safety Poster SPP 02 Preventing Slips & Trips 

3  Near Miss – ROV Shackle (potential dropped object) 

A  member  has  reported  a  near  miss  incident  in  which  an  ROV  shackle  holding  a  boulder  grab  became  loose  and  the  pin 
partially  disengaged.  The  incident  occurred  during  a  subsea  boulder  removal,  along  a  pipeline  route.  A  construction  vessel 
had  been  working  continuously  for  approximately  19  hours,  conducting  a  boulder  removal  operation.  The  ROV  operator 
spotted that the ROV shackle on the boulder grab had become loose and the pin was partially disengaged.  

The decision was made to lower and land the boulder grab on the seabed. This was done in a safe and controlled manner. 
Following  further  toolbox  and  management  of  change  and  risk  assessment  talks,  the  boulder  grab  was  recovered  and  the 
rigging changed to make it safe.   

Showing shackle (white) and pin (green) partially disengaged. 

 

 

(Left): Shackle, pin and ‘R-Clips’ shown loose 

 

(Right): Shackle, pin and ‘R-Clips’ – complete arrangement 

 

 

The ROV shackles are designed to allow easy release by the ROV. This incident demonstrates that there is also the potential 
for snagging risks, particularly during long, repetitive periods of work. 

The replacement shackle  and rigging arrangement, (25Te ROV shackle for 25Te anchor bow shackle c/w split pin) did not 
compromise the ability to abandon the boulder grab in any emergency situation.  

The preferred option is to remove the requirement for ROV shackles altogether. The 25Te anchor bow shackle should be 
connected directly to the boulder grab (where possible) and the soft sling rigging arrangement. In an emergency situation, the 
ROV would cut the soft sling and release the boulder grab. 

Our member’s investigation revealed the following potential causes of the near miss incident: 

♦  The positioning of the ROV shackle arrangement (just above the boulder grab), there was the potential for the ‘R-Clips’ 

securing the wire to become snagged, on other rigging or the boulder grab; 

♦  Every time the boulder grab landed on the sea-bed to move a boulder, the rigging would slacken. This repeated action, 

over 19 hours continuous use, could have resulted in the ‘R-Clips’ becoming dislodged and the pin working loose. 

Our member took the following action: 

♦  Lowered the boulder grab to seabed; 

♦  Undertook  a  toolbox  talk,  management  of  change  and  further  risk  assessment,  prior  to  recovery  to  deck  of  boulder 

♦  Altered the rigging: (25Te ROV shackle – 25Te anchor bow shackle c/w split pin); 

♦  Considered (where possible) removal of the ROV shackles and replacing with 25Te anchor bow shackle (c/w split pin), 

connected straight to soft sling and boulder grab; 

♦  Members are advised to be aware of the potential snagging risks and to re-assess the use of ROV shackles prior to their 

grab; 

use. 

4  High Potential Near Miss - Incompatible Pillar Valve Assembly 

A member has reported a high potential near miss incident, in which there was a failure of a pillar valve in a diver’s bailout 
set. The incident occurred  during preparation for diving  operations, requiring three twin bailout sets. Upon completion of 
assembling the three bailout sets, two sets were charged with a gas mix of He/02 (80/20%) to 300 bar. The first two twin sets 
were  filled  with  no  concerns  being  noted.  Filling  was  undertaken  in  accordance  with  industry  standards  and  company 
procedures.  

The third bailout to be charged was attached to the charging whip, secured and bailout opened. The Haskell supply valve was 
opened  to  decant  the  gas  mix  into  the  twin  bailout  set.  The  bailout  was  equalised  to  approximately  130  bar.  The  filling 
process was undertaken to fill the third twin set to the required pressure for diving operations. A small leak was detected at 
the charging whip connection to the bailout. This resulted in the repositioning of the bailout in the charge tank, so that the 
twin bailout set was submerged. This action was undertaken to assist in the cooling of the twin bailout and in the detection 
of leaks. Within less than two minutes there was a loud explosion/release of gas from the charging tank. The gas supplied was 
immediately isolated. Upon inspection it was identified that the pillar valve failed to hold the content of the cylinder. 

 
 

Twin bailout after incident 

Broken manifold assembly 

Broken assembly 

 

 

 

Our member’s investigation noted the following: 

♦  Different types of cylinders (imperial and metric) were being used on the same job site; 

♦  There was no management of change (MOC) process undertaken, to change pillar valve to twin manifold configuration; 

♦  Additional force was applied to insert new pillar valve (no inspection undertaken as to why there was a resistance). 

Our member took the following corrective actions: 

♦  Replacing bailout cylinders with metric only;  

♦  Vessel technicians to be supplied with a precision measuring instrument (for measurement of thread patterns); 

♦  Training to be undertaken by dive team / project department pertaining to the use of MOC; 

♦ 

Implement system that ensures only metric thread cylinders and components used;   

♦  Marking of all metric and imperial parts and cylinders to be undertaken for ease of identification. 

