AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 13/15 

Safety Flash 

  September 2015 

These flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing wider dissemination of lessons learnt from them.  The information below has been provided 
in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information on 
specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A number of other organisations issue safety flashes and similar documents which may be of interest to IMCA members.  Where these are particularly relevant, 
these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should be submitted 
to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Grounding and Flooding of Ferry – Complacency      

The UK Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) has published a report into the grounding and flooding of the ro-ro (“roll 
on roll off”) ferry Commodore Clipper in the Channel Islands in July 2014.  The vessel raked over two granite pinnacles at full 
sea speed of  about 18 knots; its hull was breached  and seawater flooded into double-bottom void spaces.  The grounding 
caused a noisy and shuddering vibration, but the crew did not immediately check for damage. 

The report identifies the following safety issues: 

 

Insufficient passage planning meant that the bridge team were unaware of the limits of safe water where the  vessel was 
heading, and so headed into danger without appreciation of the navigational risk.  A number of issues were not properly 
considered: 

 

  The very low tide; 

  The effect of vessel ‘squat’ in shallow water at high speed; 

  The accuracy of the chart data. 

  The possibility that the vessel had grounded was denied.  In the circumstances of a shuddering vibration, it is important 

that the crew establish the state of their vessel by searching for damage; 

  The repetitive nature of ferry operations can induce a degree of complacency when planning; 

  The electronic navigation system was not being utilised effectively because safety settings were not appropriate to the local 

conditions, warnings were ignored and the audible alarm was disabled; 

  The local responsible port authority did not have an effective risk assessment or safety management plan for the conduct 

of navigation in its statutory pilotage area. 

 
The full report can be downloaded here: https://www.gov.uk/maib-reports/grounding-and-flooding-of-ro-ro-ferry-commodore-
clipper. 

2  LTI – Rigger Struck by Rigging under Tension 

A member has reported an incident in which a rigger was struck by a winch wire and sustained a fractured arm.  The incident 
occurred during attachment and deployment of a clump weight to a riser through the moonpool.  The vessel was in the process 
of installing a riser as part of a large field development in 400m water depth.  In order to prevent damage to the riser during 
deployment of the clump weight, a hold-back winch was connected to it via a two part bridle and ROV hooks.   The winch 
would then pull the clump weight forward to allow it to be lowered without clashing with the riser.  

Once deployment of the clump weight had come to a stop, tension was released from the hold-back winch, and a rigger was 
instructed to enter the work area and disconnect the two slack ROV hooks by pulling on release ropes.  The deck supervisor 
then signalled for the winch operator to commence hoisting up on the winch.  It was during the winch hoisting movement that 
the “extension beak” on one of the ROV hooks got snagged.  The beak parted which resulted in the two part bridle complete 
with ROV hooks and winch wire flying up and striking the rigger knocking him off his feet to deck.  

The job was immediately stopped and the medic was called to the scene.  The medic quickly diagnosed that the injured person 
had suffered a broken arm as a result of the incident.  He was escorted to the on-board hospital and subsequently medivaced 
ashore to hospital where it was confirmed that he had closed fractures to the radius and ulna bones of his left arm.  

Our members’ investigation is still underway, but the following preliminary findings were noted: 

  Lack of hazard awareness and consequence for a routine task; 

  Low risk perception to the task because of other associated higher risk tasks in the same area; 

  The need to identify and mitigate all risks associated with a Management of Change (MoC) process; 

  The Management of Change process should recognise where appropriate the introduction of required additional personnel 

into the task.  

Although this task had been conducted without incident in previous riser installations, this incident acts  as a reminder of the 
need to remain vigilant at all times, particularly with routine tasks which can be seen as being “low risk”.  If there are any doubts 
about the safety of any operation, personnel should stop the job and ensure the situation is reassessed.  All personnel should 
have good “situational awareness” of what is going on at all times, and are encouraged to actively and positively contribute to 
worksite safety.  If in doubt STOP THE JOB. 

Showing ROV hook beak (left) and rigging arrangement (right) 

Further actions: 

  Deck review to identify potential snap back zones and all lines of fire zones for all winch operations; 

  Review of where crew are standing whilst doing this particular job; 

 

 
  Further crew briefings covering:  

  Toolbox talk training and workshops 

 

Line of fire awareness briefing (IMCA); 

  A review of the Management of Change process and Job Risk Analysis for this operation; 

  Assessment of suitability of ROV hooks for deck rigging activities; 

  Assessment of task procedures and risk assessments – are they available, understood and do they reflect the way the job 

  Consideration of possible negative or unforeseen effects of changes made to improve how a task is done; 

  Consideration of the required sequence of activities (e.g. who, what, when?) and agreement and confirmation of readiness 

is actually being carried out; 

before starting work; 

 

Identification of any operations/tasks which could expose personnel to a “line of fire” risk.   

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents (search words: tension): 

IMCA SF 17/08 Incident. 3 – Stored energy – injury sustained whilst removing metal straps; 

IMCA SF 11/15 Incident. 4 – Mooring line failure resulting in serious injury; 

IMCA SEL 035 – In the line of fire DVD. 

 

 

 

Members should be aware that IMCA publishes a safety promotional DVD called “In the line of fire” which can be downloaded 
or streamed online, or DVD copies can be purchased for a small charge. See IMCA SEL 036 In the line of fire. 

3  Fire Hydrants Fitted with Incorrect Coupling Sizes 

A member has reported an incident in which replacement fire hydrants were found to be fitted with incorrect coupling sizes, 
leading to them being incompatible with fire hose couplings.  This would have severely impacted the firefighting capabilities of 
the vessel.  The incident occurred following a number of earlier occasions in the previous five years in which fire hydrant valves 
in the accommodation had been found leaking.  Replacement hydrants were ordered and fitted, but the couplings were found 
to be incompatible.  It was found that the coupling on the hydrant valve in the port side forward thruster room did not fit the 
adjacent fire hose coupling.  The hose coupling measured 65mm and the hydrant coupling measured 80mm. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Our members’ investigation revealed the following:  

  The hydrant/hose coupling incompatibility was not followed up in a timely manner.  Six days elapsed between the discovery 

of the incompatibility and a Hazard Observation being made; 

  A total of thirty hydrant couplings were found with 80mm couplings fitted instead of 65mm couplings.  Had there been a 

fire these thirty couplings (incompatible) on the fire hydrants would not have been serviceable; 

  Firefighting capabilities were not entirely restricted as the outside accommodation fire hydrants on each deck  were still 
pressurised  and  compatible  with  the  fire  hoses  onboard  and  the  shipboard  accommodation  sprinkler  fire  suppression 
system was available. 

 The lessons learnt: 

  The  need  for  vigilance  and  the  importance  of  thorough  inspections  and  correctly  completing  all  checklists,  including 

examination for missing or improperly installed components: 

Lack of attention/due care/poor work practice 

 

 

Failure to identify incorrect fire hydrant valve couplings during installation of valves 

  The thirty incompatible fire hydrant valve couplings were fitted in May 2014 and this had not been spotted for many 

months, despite maintenance, safety inspections and drills; 

  When incidents, near misses, issues or concerns are reported, they should be followed up in a timely manner. 

Members may wish to check their own fire-fighting equipment, to carefully and thoroughly inspect all equipment when first 
received,  and  to  ensure  that  during  fire  drills,  hoses  are  properly  run  and  connected  to  hydrants,  including  in  the 
accommodation areas.   

Members may wish to refer to the following similar incidents relating to incorrect fittings (search words: fitting, incorrect): 

IMCA SF 07/13 –  Near miss: Failure of gas quad fitting; 

IMCA SF 19/14 – Injuries due to failure of diver’s emergency gas cylinder. 

