AB 

 

IMCA Safety Flash 11/09 

Safety Flash 

August 2009 

These  flashes  summarise  key  safety  matters  and  incidents,  allowing  wider  dissemination  of  lessons  learnt  from  them.    The  information  below  has  been 
provided in good faith by members and should be reviewed individually by recipients, who will determine its relevance to their own operations. 

The effectiveness of the IMCA safety flash system depends on receiving reports from members in order to pass on information and avoid repeat incidents.  
Please consider adding the IMCA secretariat (imca@imca-int.com) to your internal distribution list for safety alerts and/or manually submitting information 
on specific incidents you consider may be relevant.  All information will be anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate. 

A  number  of  other  organisations  issue  safety  flashes  and  similar  documents  which may  be  of  interest  to  IMCA  members.   Where  these  are  particularly 
relevant, these may be summarised or highlighted here.  Links to known relevant websites are provided at www.imca-int.com/links   Additional links should 
be submitted to webmaster@imca-int.com 

 

1  Falling Object – Struck by Crane Stop/Striker Plate 

A member has reported an incident in which workers were 
struck  by  a  falling  crane  stop/striker  plate,  causing  injuries.  
Two  third-party  contractors  were  carrying  out  non-
destructive  testing  (NDT),  lubrication  and  cutting  back 
vessel  crane  wires.    Whilst  one  of  the  contractors  was 
working  on  a  whip  line  and  removing  the  split  pin,  the 
stop/striker  plate,  weighing  5kg,  fell  from  a  stuck  position 
against the chandelier and slid approximately 40m down the 
wire.    One  contractor  sustained  a  fractured  thumb,  the 
other a minor first aid injury. 

Following  investigation,  the  following  lessons  were  drawn 
from the incident: 

♦  The  introduction  of  stop/striker  plates  had  not  been 
for 

formally 
permanently fixing the plates into position; 

risk  assessed, 

the  need 

including 

♦  Little  documented  history  existed  for  the  design  and 

installation or stop/striker plates; 

♦  Associated task-based risk assessment and toolbox talk 
did  not  include  information  relating  the  existence  of 
striker plates; 

♦  Third parties were not advised about ongoing problems 

with stop/striker plates sticking at the chandelier; 

♦  Safety  observations  previously  raised  regarding  the 
the 

possibility  of  stop/striker  plates  sticking 
chandelier had not been fully addressed; 

to 

♦  There  was  an  additional  person  involved  in  the  task, 

beyond that identified within the permit to work. 

 

 

Stop/striker plate 

  

