 
 
NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Hydrocarbon Releases 1 January – 30 June 2010 

 
The industry’s hydrocarbon release performance for the first 6 months of 2010 
has displayed a marked increase in the number of incidents reported, when 
compared with previous years. 

 
SAFETY ALERT 41 

 

Number of Hydrocarbon Releases

Uncontrolled PL release >12 500L
Uncontrolled PL release >80‐12 500L
Uncontrolled HC gas release >300 kg
Uncontrolled HC gas release >1‐300 kg

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

1/1/10 to 
30/6/10

 

This upward trend in statistics is cause for concern. 

The releases reported to NOPSA for the six months between January and June 
2010(inclusive), are almost equal to the total for the entire 2009 twelve month 
period.  

Whilst the majority of incidents have involved low flow, pinhole type releases (i.e. 
small release rates over extended periods of time) and in general, have posed a 
minimal threat to the safety of people, these releases are often found to be the 
precursors of far more serious events. 

NOPSA has received 22 reports of hydrocarbon releases over this 6 month 
period.  Of these: 

  20 have been gas releases; 

  16 have occurred on Floating Production, Storage and Offloading (FPSO) 

facilities; and 

  3 have been releases of over 300 kg of gas. 

Page 1 of 4 

 

r
e
b
m
u
N

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
SAFETY ALERT 41 

 

 
 
NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Hydrocarbon Releases 1 January – 30 June 2010 

 
The operators of facilities reporting these incidents have conducted internal   
investigations to determine the root causes and to develop corrective actions with 
the intent of preventing future occurrences of similar events.  NOPSA has 
examined the operator’s investigations and analysed trends in root causes and 
equipment types.  From these reports the following data has been captured: 

 

 

 

 

 

Most common Root Causes: 

  Lack of preventative / predictive maintenance 

  Lack of routine inspection 

 

Inadequacies in competency / training 

  Procedures Incorrect / Not Followed 

 

Most common Equipment Involved: 

 

Instrumentation and Fittings 

  Gaskets and Seals 

Key Lessons 

The most common root causes and equipment involved indicate where 
immediate attention is required, but there is also a requirement for long-term 
focus to reduce the number of hydrocarbon releases. 

Operators are responsible for managing their facilities to prevent the loss of 
containment of hydrocarbons.  Some of the findings from operators’ reports can 
assist with improving the safety performance at offshore facilities. 

Issues to consider for safety performance improvement include: 

  The failure to complete corrective actions from operators’ 

investigations and inspections in a timely manner  

Deviations, Case to Operate, and Temporary Operating Procedures are 
often short-term fixes to allow for operating outside of the normal 
operating envelope.  Ensure that they are not assigned “long term”, but 
have a lifespan that allows reasonable time for permanent engineered 
solutions to be put in place. 

 

  Are personnel competent for the task? Several reports listed cross 

threading, over-tightening etc. of fittings as a contributor to 
releases.  

Page 2 of 4 

 

 
 
NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Hydrocarbon Releases 1 January – 30 June 2010 

Have personnel received the correct training for identifying, installing and 
maintaining high pressure (HP) gas compression fittings? 

 
SAFETY ALERT 41 

 

  Generally, the primary focus for an FPSO is the oil stream.  

Is appropriate focus placed on the facility’s gas streams and systems? 

  Some reports contained references to repeat failures.  

Is the first warning being responded to effectively? Are “lessons learned” 
being captured effectively? Are these lessons being communicated? Are 
prevention measures and risk controls being implemented?  Is it being 
confirmed that corrective actions have been fully implemented? 

  Many leaks occurred during the re-starting of plant following 

planned and unplanned outages.  

Is enough attention focused on the rate of change for pressure and 
temperature? To maintain integrity, do these engineered rates need to be 
re-visited as facilities and systems age? Is there a need for a Pre-Startup 
Safety Review? 

 

Investigations may need more focus on the “where” factor. 

 Where did it occur?  Where else can it occur?  Can something that 
happened on another facility happen on this facility? 

 

 

 

 

 

Who is responsible? 

(i)  The operator of an offshore facility is the primary duty holder and has a 

general duty of care under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas 
Storage Act 2006 to ensure that all work and other activities are safe, and 
that the risk to the health of people is as low as reasonably practicable.  
Specifically, the operator must implement and maintain a safe system of 
work for any plant and equipment. 

(ii)  Any person who is in control of any part of a facility or particular work 

carried out at a facility has similar duties to the operator for that part of the 
facility or that particular activity. 

(iii)  Every person at a facility must at all times, take all reasonably practicable 

steps to ensure that by any act or omission, they do not create or increase a 
risk to the health or safety of either themselves or anyone else. 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Hydrocarbon Releases 1 January – 30 June 2010 

 
Contact 

For further information, email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 41. 

 
SAFETY ALERT 41 

 

 

Page 4 of 4 

 

