 

 

 

 

 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

  

SAFETY ALERT  23 

Engine Room Fire on MODU in Australian waters 

What happened? 

An  engine  room  fire  occurred  recently  onboard  a  MODU  in  Australian  waters. 

The fire alarm activated when an engine room heat detector was triggered. The 

control  room  operator  checked  the  engine  room,  saw  the  fire  and  raised  the 

general alarm with public address announcements. Lube oil spray in the engine 

room  triggered  a  motion  sensor  which  in  turn  caused  the  engine  room  closed 
circuit  TV  system  to  record  the  incident  from  the  time  the  lube  oil  spray  began 

and before the lube oil ignited.  

The  muster  check  was  completed,  the  engine  room  was  shut  down,  the  space 
was sealed and the CO2 was applied within 10 minutes of the fire being detected. 
This procedure was in accordance with recently issued company procedures. No 

attempt was made to initially fight the fire by hand. 

The flooding of the engine room with CO2 was effective in extinguishing the fire. 
Boundary cooling was achieved using a fixed deluge system on the engine room 

roof and fire hoses from the rig fire water systems. The area was inspected after 

one hour and the fire was declared to be extinguished. The space was ventilated 

and  the  atmosphere  tested  before  the  fire  team  entered  to  inspect  the  area. 

There were no injuries. 

This prompt action resulted in no escalation to the fire, therefore damage to the 

engine room and its equipment was not sufficient to prevent the rig from returning 
to normal operations. 

What went wrong? 

The  cause  of  the  fire  was  lube  oil  spraying  from  a  disconnected  lube  oil  pipe 

fitting  onto  a  hot  exhaust  pipe.  The  engine  room  has  four  generators.  Three 
generators were running and one had been shut down by the mechanic to carry 

out work on some small oil leaks. Each engine was fitted with a lube oil priming 

pump system that operates separately from the engine systems. This pump was 

A61036 

Page 1 of 2 

24-09-2008 

 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

  

SAFETY ALERT  23 

set  to  operate  for  five  minutes  every  hour.  The  mechanic  had  a  lube  oil  pipe 

coupling disconnected on the engine when it was time for his meal break. When 

he  was  away,  the  lube  oil  priming  pump  cut  in.  Lube  oil  from  the  disconnected 

coupling  sprayed  onto  the  deckhead  above  an  adjacent  generator  which  was 

running. Lube oil dripped onto the hot exhaust and ignited, starting the fire. 

Key Lessons: 

•  There  was  no  pre-job  planning  or  job  safety  analysis  carried  out  for  this 
task. If the job had been discussed and planned beforehand between the 

Mechanic  and  his  supervisor,  the  Chief  Engineer,  the  Mechanic’s  lack  of 

knowledge  of  the  lube  oil  priming  system  may  have  become  apparent. 

Supervisors  should  satisfy  themselves  that  their  crews  are  competent  to 

carry out the tasks given to them. 

•  There  were  no  signs  or  instructions  provided  on  the  equipment  or  the 
engine control panels to indicate that the lube oil priming pump was on a 

separate  circuit  from  the  engine.  The  provision  of  the  lube  oil  priming 

system  had  been  a  recent  modification.  Sufficient  information  and 

instructions  should  be  provided  for  the  safe  operation  of  any  equipment. 

This  is  a  clear  example  of  failing  to  complete  a  Management  of  Change 

process;  the  actual  installation  of  the  lube  oil  system  was  completed 

satisfactorily, but the associated changes to safety management systems 

were not completed. 

•  This incident highlights the importance of emergency response for various 

scenarios. Practice makes perfect.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 23 

A61036 

Page 2 of 2 

24-09-2008 

 

