 
 
SAFETY ALERT 34 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Bulkhead and Deck Fires 

What happened? 
 
Case 1 – “Flame-washing” was being conducted to remove welded tie-rods.  The 
deck where the work was being carried out formed a ceiling to the main store.  
Combustible material had been used as insulation in the deck-head which 
resulted in a significant fire and explosion. 

Fire damage to the main store initiated 
from “flame washing” on the deck 
above. 

 
Case 2 – Welding was conducted to fix patches in a corroded and leaking deck.  
Insulation under the deck was inspected prior to the job; however the 
combustibility of the insulation material was not recognised.  Smoke was seen 
emerging from cabin roof spaces which triggered the evacuation of 
accommodation and a general muster. 

Fire damage to ceiling space initiated 
by welding on the deck plate above

 
Case 3 – A bundle of clean rags in a store was ignited following welding on a 
deck above. 

Typical burnt paint from radiant heat 
associated with the welding on the 
main deck above 

 
In each of these cases fire was caused by welding/cutting operations on one side 
of a deck or bulkhead, and the fire started on the other (hidden) side of the deck. 

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 
 
SAFETY ALERT 34 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Bulkhead and Deck Fires 

What could go wrong? 
 
Fires on offshore facilities can have a devastating effect.  In one of these cases 
two fire-team members were burnt, with one man being hospitalised.  Damage to 
the facility took over 6 weeks to repair. 
 
Fires which start in areas that are unattended, inaccessible or are well secured 
can grow to a considerable size and cause significant damage before they are 
detected.  Fires offshore will inevitably lead to lost operational time, significant 
expense and immediate risk to personnel. 
 
Key Lessons 
 
Permit to work systems are only administrative controls.  In all the cases 
described above, permits were in place but failed to prevent the fire.   
 
Control of combustible material is critical.  Deck-heads should be inspected prior 
to any hot-work.  The combustibility of all insulation or other material in close 
proximity to the deck or bulkhead should be clearly established.  Insulation fitted 
during shipyard refits must be inspected to ensure it is not readily combustible. 
 
Appropriate consideration of the requirement for firewatchers both at the work 
site and on the other side of bulkheads and decks should be given during permit 
preparation. 
 
Fires can smoulder for a significant period after work has ceased and therefore 
consideration should also be given to making thorough post-job inspections a 
requirement of the permit. 
 
Who is responsible? 
 
Welding and cutting work will almost always fall under the control of the operator 
of the facility. 
 
Area authorities / supervisors need to establish if there are combustible material 
hazards in the area prior to approving permits. 
 
Operators of facilities have a duty of care to ensure safe systems of work.  This 
can be taken to include permit systems; pre-and post work site inspections; 
adequate and trained fire-watchers; and documented procedures for risk 
assessment and specific hot-work tasks. 
 
 
Contact 
 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 34. 

 

Page 2 of 2 

 

