NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Dangers of Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) for Long Haul Travellers to 
Facilities

SAFETY ALERT 27

What happened?

It has come to the attention of NOPSA that a number of expatriate workers travelling on 
long haul flights to facilities in Australia have been diagnosed with DVT soon after 
reporting to work on a facility.

What could go wrong?

DVT is a blood clot in one of the deep veins usually in the calf or thigh.  In this part of the 
body, blood moves quite slowly and when a clot occurs, it can get stuck in the vein 
blocking the blood supply. Symptoms aren’t always immediately obvious and a blood 
clot is not necessarily fatal. However, these blood clots can become dislodged and 
travel to the lungs or other areas, causing strokes, severe organ damage, or death.

When you sit for a long time without contracting the muscles in your legs, blood can pool 
in the veins resulting in DVT.  Tightly packed seating, such as that found in the economy 
section of airlines, can restrict movement.  However, it is the lack of movement rather 
than the lack of space that is the probable cause of DVT.  Hence, business/first class 
travel need not necessarily provide the solution to the problem.

Doctors suspect that keeping legs stationery combined with dehydration interrupts the 
blood flow which causes clots, cutting off the supply of oxygen to various parts of the 
body.

Although DVT can affect anyone, certain groups are more at risk. Anyone who has any 
of the following can be considered to be at an increased risk of DVT:

• Previous personal history of DVT;

• Family history of DVT;

• Recent surgery or injury, particularly involving the legs;

• Women on hormone replacement therapy;

• Active cancer;

• Overweight or obese;

• Smoker;

• Older age; and

Page 1 of 2

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY

Dangers of Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) for Long Haul Travellers to 
Facilities

SAFETY ALERT 27

• Chronic disease, especially heart or lung disease and diabetes.

If you have multiple risk factors noted above you should take extreme care while 
travelling and possibly seek medical advice.

Key Lessons:

There are a few simple steps that can greatly reduce the chances of getting DVT.  These 
are:

• Periodically stretch out and move your legs and ankles and massage your calves 

while seated to stimulate blood circulation, don’t cross your legs;

• Remain hydrated, drink plenty of water or other non alcoholic fluids during your 

• Restrict excessive alcohol and coffee consumption during travel as it may cause 

flight;

dehydration;

• Avoid taking strong sleeping tablets or sedatives which may result in sitting 

without moving for long periods;

• Wear loose, non restrictive clothing during air travel; and

•

If safe to do so, get up and walk around a least once an hour.

Most important, if after arriving to a facility or returning home you feel in any way unwell 
report immediately to a medic or medical practitioner.

Contact

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 27.

Disclaimer: This safety alert is based on publicly available information and was written
for general information only.  The safety alert does not purport to be definitive and is not 
a substitute for advice from a general practitioner, qualified physician or counsellor.

Acknowledgements

Part of this information was originally published on CSIRO Minerals OHSE website
http://www.minerals.csiro.au/safety/ecs.htm

Page 2 of 2

