  

SAFETY ALERT 22 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Diver Safety 
 
What happened? 

There have been two recent commercial diving incidents requiring therapeutic 
decompression treatment for divers working offshore in the oil and gas industry. 
Both incidents occurred separately and both divers benefited from the immediate 
therapeutic decompression treatments they were given once symptoms of 
decompression sickness were identified. 

What went wrong? 

Commercial diving incidents requiring therapeutic decompression treatment are 
comparatively rare in Australian waters. It must be remembered that 
decompression sickness is hard to predict - any person who has been subject to 
increased barometric pressure can suffer from decompression sickness or 
pressure related injuries. Even when the diving tables have been correctly 
followed, incidents requiring therapeutic decompression treatment can and do 
occur. 

Key Lessons: 

Divers may require therapeutic decompression treatment for diving injuries 
caused in different ways and exhibiting different symptoms. In all diving incidents 
requiring therapeutic decompression treatment, early diagnosis and treatment of 
the symptoms are vital to ensure the diver’s return to health. A delay in treatment 
can have an adverse affect on the treatment outcome. 
 
When divers are exposed to increased barometric pressure from the surface to -
10 metres it is unlikely that they would develop symptoms of decompression 
sickness even when exposed to those increased pressures for prolonged periods 
of time.  However, it is important to note that from -10 metres to the surface, a 
gas actually doubles in volume and can cause pressure related injuries to divers 
requiring therapeutic decompression treatment to be given.  
 
Immediate therapeutic decompression treatment is the preferred treatment of 
choice for these types of diving related incidents. For this reason, it is important 
that commercial divers have timely access to diving medical advice and a 
decompression chamber properly manned and equipped to administer the 
therapeutic decompression treatments.  

Contact       for  further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 22. 

 

 

 

A60921 
 
 

Page 1 of 1                                 24-09-2008   

 
 

 
 

