 

SAFETY ALERT 33 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Hazardous Area Electrical Equipment 
 
What happened? 

An emerging trend identified during NOPSA’s planned inspections of facilities is the range of 
safety issues relating to electrical equipment in hazardous areas.  Typical safety issues 
identified include: 

o  Fixed electrical equipment not suitable for the hazardous zone (i.e. not correctly rated). 

o  Corrosion of electrical equipment (e.g. motors, instruments, junction boxes, etc.) 

potentially compromising the hazardous area rating. 

o  Non-rated portable electrical equipment (e.g. hand drills, non-EX rated lighting, etc.) 

used in hazardous areas. 

o  Poorly maintained hazardous area equipment e.g. damaged glands and seals, broken 

conduit, missing labelling, mismatched colour-coding, exposed wiring, etc. 

o  Electrical wiring not appropriately terminated and, in some cases, still ‘live’. 

o  Poorly maintained hazardous area electrical equipment dossiers or registers and expired 

certification. 

 

Photo 1 – Damaged Conduit and Exposed Wiring 

Photo 2 – Poorly Maintained Light Fitting in 

Process Area 

Photo 3 – Corroded Junction Box on Pump Motor 

Photo 4 – Loose Wiring  

(Not Appropriately Terminated) 

 

 

 

Page 1 of 3 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT 33 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Hazardous Area Electrical Equipment 

 

Photo 6 – Corroded Junction Box 

Photo 5 – Exposed Wiring (pulled out of gland) 

Photo 7 – Poor Dressing of Cables 

Note: Photographs taken either with an intrinsically safe rated camera or under control of hot work permit. 
 
Most of the safety issues identified with electrical equipment occur on aging facilities where 
maintenance is lacking.  However, there have been instances of incorrectly rated hazardous 
area electrical equipment being installed in hazardous zones on newer facilities. 
 

What could go wrong? 

Inappropriate or poorly maintained electrical equipment could become an ignition source, 
posing a fire and explosion risk in the event of a release of hydrocarbons or other flammable 
materials (e.g. hydrogen evolved from UPS batteries, diesel aerosols, vapours from solvents 
and paints, etc).  
 

Key Lessons: 

The Australian and international standards applied in relation to selection and installation of 
electrical equipment for use in hazardous areas must be specified in the safety case for the 
facility [MoSOF 11].  Once the safety case has been accepted, there is an obligation to 
comply with the safety case in force [MoSOF 49]. 

The legislation also imposes duties of care on a range of parties, including the operator of the 
facility, to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the facility is safe and without 
risk to the health of any person at or near the facility [OPGGSA 2006 Sch. 3, Clause 9].  This 
includes the requirement to properly maintain electrical equipment for use in hazardous areas. 

 

Page 2 of 3 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT 33 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Hazardous Area Electrical Equipment 
 

 
Failures in the selection, installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in hazardous 
areas have resulted in numerous inspection recommendations.  A range of enforcement 
actions has also been taken by NOPSA, including improvement notices and in some cases 
prohibition notices, where the identified defects could lead to an immediate threat to health or 
safety. 

It is important to ensure that electrical equipment used in hazardous areas is suitable and 
appropriately certified for the relevant hazardous zone.  Hazardous area-rated electrical 
equipment is often used as safety-critical equipment in the prevention of fire and explosion 
and, like all other safety-critical equipment, should be subjected to regular specialist 
inspection, maintenance and recertification.  In addition, it is essential to properly manage the 
documentation necessary to ensure hazardous area electrical equipment is maintained in a 
safe state. 
 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 33. 

 

Page 3 of 3 

 

