SAFETY ALERT [39] 

  

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Compressor Failure and Subsequent Fire on Facility 

 

What happened? 

A high pressure gas compressor experienced a catastrophic failure during start up 
on an FPSO (Floating Production Storage and Offload) vessel. This failure caused a 
hydrocarbon gas release that auto ignited, resulting in a local jet fire at the compressor 
and a second fire within the gas turbine enclosure. Fortunately no personnel were 
injured during the incident.  

Centrifugal gas compressors are widely utilised on production facilities within 
Australian waters. They are typically used to compress gas required for export or 
well re-injection.  A typical gas compressor configuration consists of 1st LP (low 
pressure) stage, 2nd IP (intermediate pressure) stage and 3rd HP (high pressure) 
stage.  

What could go wrong? 

•  High reliance on a single piece of safety critical equipment - for example, an 

instrument 

• 

• 

alarms 

Inadequate commissioning of the compressor’s control systems 

Inadequate protection systems in place to protect compressors from 
operating outside design limitations  

•  Personnel overwhelmed by ‘Nuisance’ Alarms’ can overlook significant 

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

SAFETY ALERT [39] 

  

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Compressor Failure and Subsequent Fire on Facility 

•  Personnel not trained for site specific equipment operation 

Inadequate management of safety device ‘inhibits’  

Inadequate commissioning of fire protections systems 

• 

• 

 

Key Lessons: 

•  Ensure commissioning activities are correctly undertaken and verified by 

competent persons.  

•  Ensure control room operations personnel have the required competence and 

training for their specific control system and type of compressor on location.  

•  Ensure control room operators are not overloaded by ‘nuisance’ alarms by 

ensuring effective alarm management through alarm rationalisation. 

•  Any overrides on safety controls should be controlled and be properly risk 

assessed.  

monitoring. 

compressor. 

•  Repetitive alarms need to be properly investigated and resolved.  
•  Ensure effective management of procedural controls by compliance 

•  Wherever possible minimise dependence on operators in safeguarding the 

•  Develop the compressor’s safe guard system to ensure a fail safe design. 
•  Consider the impact of an instrument failure in machine control or protection 

systems, particularly if fail-to-danger is undetected.  

•  Ensure integrity of fire protection systems 
 
 

Who is responsible? 

Under  provisions  of  the  Offshore  Petroleum  and  Greenhouse  Gas  Storage  Act  2006, 
operators  of  facilities  have  a  duty  of  care  to  ensure  that  plant  and  equipment  at  the 
facility are safe and without risk to health. Suppliers of plant have a duty to ensure that 
plant, when properly used, is safe and without risk to health. 

 
 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert [39]. 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

