Safety alert 63

December 2016 

Quality assurance of diving system audits

What happened?

A  number  of  NOPSEMA  inspections have identified a  trend  in the  standard  of  audits  conducted  on  diving 
systems  and  equipment.  Specifically,  a  number  of  operators  of  diving  projects and  diving  contractors have 
failed to ensure diving system audits have been conducted to an appropriate standard.

While reviewing the audits conducted by the diving project operators and the diving contractors, NOPSEMA’s 
inspectors identified the following deficiencies:

 Man-riding  wire  destructive  test  certification  was  not  adequately  assessed, resulting  in  the  failure  to 
identify  that  the  percentage deterioration  was  greater than  that  permitted by  the relevant  International 
Marine Contractor’s Association (IMCA) code/guidelines and therefore should have been replaced.

 Inappropriate  application  of  a  management  of  change  process to  justify  the  deferral  of  man-riding  wire 

destructive tests.

 Utilisation  of  a self-propelled  hyperbaric lifeboat  (SPHL)  with  the connections  for the emergency services 
(e.g.  breathing  gas,  cooling,  etc.)  located in  a  place  on  the  SPHL  that  was  not  readily  accessible,  and 
therefore  not  as  required  by  the  relevant 
International  Marine  Organisation  (IMO)
codes/guidelines.

IMCA and 

 Failure to make an emergency services umbilical available for SPHL connection to its life support package.

 A high pressure (200 bar) flexible oxygen hose was found during a NOPSEMA inspection to be too long, 

made up with joins and was damaged, however it was marked as compliant during an earlier audit

 Older diving systems built to class have not been upgraded, where practicable, to meet current class 
requirements e.g. fire suppression systems within diving chambers unable to be externally actuated.

Each of the deficiencies outlined above should have been identified and rectified as a result of the third party 
or in-house audits.

What could go wrong?

Failure to identify audit non-conformances associated with safety-critical elements of a diving system may 
result in an increased level of risk to the air and saturation divers. The non-conformance examples provided 
above have the potential to compromise the integrity of the system components and reduce functionality in 
an emergency. Any loss of integrity or system redundancy has the potential to result in serious injury or 
fatalities to divers and others involved in diving operations.

Key lessons

the task

Operators of diving projects and diving contractors should have measures in place to ensure:
 quality assurance checks are carried out on third party and in-house diving system audits
 audits are conducted by suitably trained and qualified personnel
 audits are reviewed by personnel who have the necessary experience and knowledge to be competent for 

 auditor observation lists are reviewed to identify any potential non-conformance items
 non-conformance close out actions are documented and verified by a competent person
 safety-critical non-conformance items are verified closed prior to the commencement of diving operations.

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

A530425

20/12/16

1 of 2

Quality assurance of diving system audits 

Safety alert

Diving project hazard identification workshops and hazard registers consistently record IMCA compliant diving 
systems as a control for a multitude of hazards. Diving system IMCA audit compliance provides the divers, 
supervisors and the operator of the diving project, with a level of assurance that the diving system is safe and 
fit for its intended use.

It is important that these IMCA audits are effectively managed as part of the operator’s quality assurance and 
diving project risk assessment processes, to ensure the diving operations are safe and risks are reduced to as 
low as reasonably practicable (ALARP).

The legislation

Clause 9 of Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 requires that ‘the 
operator of a facility must take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the facility is safe and without 
risk to the health of any person at or near the facility.’ This includes an obligation to take all reasonable 
practicable steps to:

 implement and maintain systems of work that are safe and without risk to health [Clause 9(2)(d)]; and

 provide all members of the workforce with the information, training and supervision necessary for them to 

carry out their activities in a manner that does not adversely affect the safety of persons at the facility 
[Clause 9(2)(f)].

 For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Safety alert 63. NOPSEMA safety alerts 

are published at nopsema.gov.au, on the ‘Safety Alerts’ page under the ‘Safety’ tab.

Contact

Further information

The following oil and gas publications provide further information about the recommended practice on diving 
system inspection and auditing:

 The International Marine Contractors Association, Annual Auditing of Diving Systems. IMCA D 011 Rev 1 –

December 2010.  http://www.imca-int.com/diving-division.aspx

 The International Maritime Contractors Association, Diving Equipment Systems Inspection Guidance Note, 

DESIGN for Saturation (Bell) Diving Systems, IMCA D 024 Revision 2 July 2014. http://www.imca-
int.com/diving-division.aspx

 The International Marine Contractors Association, DESIGN for Surface Orientated (Air) Diving Systems, 

IMCA D 023 Rev. 1 January 2014.  http://www.imca-int.com/diving-division.aspx

 The International Marine Contractors Association, Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems (HES) Interface 

Requirements, IMCA D 051 Rev. 1 October 2014. http://www.imca-int.com/diving-division.aspx

 The International Marine Contractors Association, Guidance on Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems, IMCA D052 

May 2013.  http://www.imca-int.com/diving-division.aspx

 International Association of Oil & Gas Producers, Saturation Diving Emergency Hyperbaric Evacuation and 

Recovery Performance Requirements. OGP 478 – September 2014.  
http://www.iogp.org/Reports/Type/478/id/660

 International Association of Oil & Gas Producers, Diving System Assurance. OGP 468 - February 2016.  

http://www.iogp.org/Reports/Type/468/id/633

 International Maritime Organisation, Resolution A.692(17) 1991, Guidelines and Specifications for 

Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems.  
http://www.imo.org/en/KnowledgeCentre/IndexofIMOResolutions/Pages/Assembly-(A).aspx.

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

A530425

20/12/16

2 of 2

