  

SAFETY ALERT 19 

Dropped Blocks 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 

What happened? 

The  semisubmersible  Mobile  Offshore 
Drilling  Unit  (MODU)  was  in  the  final 
stages  of  pulling  the  Blowout  Preventer 
(BOP).  The BOP was being lifted the last 
metre  to  gain  clearance  for  access  to  the 
BOP  transporter  in  the  moonpool.    With 
the  travelling  block  at the  uppermost  limit, 
the  Kinetic  Energy  Management  System 
(KEMS)  was  ‘tripped’,  and  the  resulting 
action  was  not  as  expected.    A  failure  in 
the  drawworks  disc  braking  system 
allowed the traveling blocks, complete with 
riser  and  suspended  BOP,  to  descend 
approximately 
an 
uncontrolled  manner,  until  the  Top  Drive 
impacted against the riser gimbal at the rig 
floor  level.    The  subsequent  investigation 
concluded that there was no operator error 
and  the  incident  was  a  result  of  a  disc 
brake system failure.  

50  metres 

in 

 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

Top Drive impacted riser gimbal at rig floor level 

The  MODU  had  recently  undergone  a  drawworks  brake  upgrade  (band  brakes  to  disc 
brakes).  The installation and tie-in consisted of: 

Installation of disc brake kit with anti-bird nest feature 

KEMS software upgrade with interface 

Elmagco brake interface 

Crown’o’matic interface 

Commissioning of system 

What went wrong? 

The anti-bird nesting components were incorrectly installed thus limiting the 1200 psi 
used to function the service brake to 200psi. 
When the drawworks were hoisted into the KEMS upper limit the anti-bird nesting 
system reduced the pressure to the service brakes from 1200psi to 200psi and the 
emergency brake pressure was dumped allowing the calipers to set.  Due to the limited 
supply pressure of 200psi, the service calipers had minimal, if any, effect.  The 
emergency calipers and Elmagco brake were not designed to stop the load under 
dynamic conditions on their own. 

Page 1 of 2 

 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

  

SAFETY ALERT 19 

Dropped Blocks 

Causal  factors  included  incorrect  installation  of the  anti-bird  nest  /  disc brake  hydraulic 
interface;  inadequate  commissioning  of  the  upgraded  (6  months  prior)  disc  brake 
system;  the  disc  brake  system  handover  from  the  supplier  to  rig  personnel  was 
inadequate;  Management  of  Change  process  during  system  upgrade  was  not 
implemented  effectively;  and  follow  up  and  understanding  of  previous  disc  brake 
incidents was inadequate. 

Key Lessons: 

Rigs equipped with disc brakes equipped with anti-bird nesting functions should be 
alerted  to  the  potential  problems  arising  from  incorrect  installation  of  hydraulic 
control valves.  

Commissioning  procedures  for  modifications  to  existing  facilities  should  be 
reviewed to ensure: 

(cid:190)  Commissioning is carried out on a complete system basis, as well as on 

the system interfaces.  

(cid:190)  User training is adequate to obtain sound knowledge of the upgrade and 

its impact and interactions with other facility systems. 

(cid:190)  As built drawings and operating manuals are available to facility 

personnel for newly installed/upgraded systems 

Rig  owners  should  review  the  implementation  of  their  Management  of  Change 
process to ensure that it is properly implemented for upgrade work on their facilities 
with clear work scopes and accountabilities identified. 

Rig  owners  should  ascertain  that  management  places  appropriate  emphasis  on 
procedural  compliance  and  adherence.  Reliable  document  control  systems  must 
ensure  critical  information  is  captured  in  procedures,  and  that  the  most  current 
procedures are in use. 

The  importance  of  carrying  out  thorough  and  systematic  accident/incident 
investigations is highlighted.  Capturing lessons learned and correcting root causes 
is key in prevention of further associated incidents. 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 19. 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

 

Page 2 of 2 

 

