 

Safety alert 58 

 

January 2014 

 

Vibration-induced fatigue on process pipework 

What happened? 

During a recent inspection at a facility, a NOPSEMA inspector observed vibration-induced fatigue cracking and 
evidence of rectification work carried out on several small bore connections on seawater cooling pipes.  On 
further investigation, it was discovered that there had also been a recent fatigue failure on the hydrocarbon 
test separator header.  Fortunately, the operator had detected hydrocarbon leaking out of the crack and the 
line was repaired without any major release of hydrocarbons.  

The operator of the facility initially did not report the incident as a dangerous occurrence (damage to safety 
critical equipment), as it was considered only a “minor weep”. 

  

 

Failed hydrocarbon test header with engineered 
temporary clamp  

Seawater line with fatigue cracking 

What could go wrong? 

Key lessons: 
• 

In certain situations, vibration-induced fatigue could lead to a loss of containment of a significant quantity of 
hydrocarbons, which if ignited could result in a major accident event involving multiple fatalities.   

The risk of vibration-induced fatigue on hydrocarbon facilities must be thoroughly assessed.  All types of 
excitation should be considered, including: 

•  pulsation from reciprocating and positive displacement pumps and compressors, rotational stall 

•  flow induced turbulence 

•  mechanical excitation 

and flow induced excitation 

•  high frequency acoustic fatigue 

•  surge/momentum changes due to valve operations 

•  cavitation and flashing.  

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

 Rev 0 A339011 

28/01/2014 

1 of 2 

 

Safety alert 58 

Vibration-induced fatigue on 
process pipework 

 

The Energy Institute, based in the United Kingdom, has developed guidelines for the avoidance of 
vibration-induced fatigue failure in process pipework. The guidelines can be used from the design stage 
through to the operational stage in the life of a facility to identify and address pipework at risk of 
vibration-induced fatigue. 

It is a requirement to report any dangerous occurrence on a facility to NOPSEMA under Clause 82 of 
Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006.  Regulation 2.41 of the 
Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage (Safety) Regulations 2009, defines a dangerous 
occurrence as: 

•  An occurrence that did not cause, but could reasonably have caused: 

a. 

the death of, or serious personal injury to, a person; or 

b.  a member of the workforce to be incapacitated from performing work for a period of at least 3 

days. 

•  A fire or explosion 

•  A collision of a marine vessel with the facility 

•  An uncontrolled release of hydrocarbon vapour exceeding 1 kilogram 

•  An uncontrolled release of petroleum liquids exceeding 80 litres 

•  A well kick exceeding 8 cubic metres (or 50 barrels) 

•  An unplanned event that required the emergency response plan to be implemented 

•  Damage to safety-critical equipment 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Alert 58. 

 

• 

• 

 

 

 

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

Rev 0 A339011 

28/01/14 

2 of 2 

