 

 

 

Safety alert 61 

 

November 2015 

 

Risks associated with electric storage batteries  

What happened? 

Recently, NOPSEMA was notified of a fire that occurred in the battery room on a production facility. This 
incident has highlighted the potential for thermal runaway events, specifically, when there is short circuit 
between two or more battery banks of uninterruptible power supply (UPS). This incident was likely caused by 
leaking electrolyte fluid contacting a conductive metal cabinet frame in the UPS battery room. There were no 
injuries caused as a result of this incident. However, containing the fire, albeit relatively small, presented 
challenges. 

Figure 1 – First entry into the battery room post 
incident. 

 

 
Figure 2 – Battery cabinet with doors removed. 
Damage within left cabinet. 

 

What could go wrong? 

Lead acid batteries are capable of delivering an electric charge at a very high rate and, when charging, can 
release flammable hydrogen gases. As such, when these hydrogen gases are combined with oxygen, they have 
the potential to cause an explosion. 

Valve regulated batteries described as ‘maintenance free’ are less likely to release hydrogen than conventional 
flooded electrolyte batteries in normal operational conditions. However, it is still important to take care when 
charging valve regulated batteries. Hydrogen can be released through the pressure relief valves if the battery 
charging current or voltage are exceeded, which can also lead to a potential explosion.   

Batteries can contain significant stored energy. Under certain circumstances this energy may be released very 
rapidly. This can occur during short circuit faults, for example, when the terminals are short-circuited. In the 
event of a short circuit condition, very large fault currents can be generated, which can result in rapid heat 
rise. Explosions associated with the fault can result in a shower of molten metal, which can cause serious 
injuries and ignite explosive gases present around the battery. 

 

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

A452884     Rev 0 

04/11/15 

1 of 3 

 

               Safety alert 61 

 

 

Most battery cells produce low voltages and therefore there is limited risk of electric shock, however, some 
large battery banks produce more than 120 volts DC. Personnel should be protected from the dangers of 
electric shock by ensuring that: 

live conductors are effectively insulated or protected  

• 
•  access to areas where there are dangerous voltages is controlled  
•  appropriate warning signage is displayed. 

Key lessons 

Battery installations should be designed to eliminate or reduce the risk of fault currents associated with 
battery terminals or short circuits to the battery stands or trays. Battery stands or trays should be insulated 
and access to battery terminals, inspection caps, or charge indicators should be sufficient to allow effective 
maintenance to be conducted safely.  

•  Store batteries in a cool, well-ventilated area away from ignition sources. Where batteries are 

arranged in two or more tiers, adequate circulation of air should be provided. 

• 

Large battery banks should be located in a dedicated battery room with minimal other equipment and 
services.  

•  Dedicated battery rooms should consider potential explosive gas (hydrogen) release under both 
normal charging and fault conditions and should consider utilising explosive protected electrical 
equipment within the space.   

•  Battery room ventilation systems and ducts should be separated from other ventilation systems and 

lead to safe open air locations. 

•  Battery rooms should be provided with smoke and/or heat detection. In addition, provision of gas 

detection should also be considered for battery rooms. 

•  Battery rooms not provided with fixed active fire protection systems such as carbon dioxide (CO2), 
Inergen or other inert gas should be provided with portable CO2 or dry powder fire extinguishers. 

•  Batteries should be fixed to prevent any movement arising from the motions of any floating facility. 
•  Battery storage design should consider containment of potential electrolyte leakage and should be 

spill proof. 

• 

Lead acid and alkaline batteries should not be placed in the same space unless separated by suitable 
screens. 

•  Follow all instructions and manufacturers recommendations and check the manufacturer’s 

specifications on battery storage and battery charging thresholds. Record date of manufacture, 
installation, and the maximum end of life of batteries. 

Ensure procedures are in place for undertaking regular visual inspections including checking for cleanliness, 
corrosion, electrolyte levels leaking electrolyte, charge indicators, charging current, system voltage, charger 
status and alarms, and earth fault indication.    

Regular load testing of battery banks should be performed and the discharge duration and accepted voltage 
drop should be identified in the performance standards. Thermography testing while battery banks are 
subjected to load conditions should be considered to identify any loose connections that can lead to a supply 
loss or result in a potential fire.  

Battery maintenance should consider the effects of battery sulfation, which can lead to a number of battery 
faults, for example, cell short circuit, excessive voltage drop or lead to casing damage and electrolyte loss. 

Battery charger fault indication and alarms should be considered and appropriately monitored to ensure 
effective battery charging is maintained. 

Battery earth fault detection systems should be provided for larger battery installations to provide warnings of 
low levels of insulation resistance. 

 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

A452884     Rev 0 

04/11/15 

2 of 3 

 

               Safety alert 61 

 

The facility performance standards should clearly identify the operational performance required for the 
battery systems. Operational performance may include:  

• 
• 
• 

the minimum operating duration required for the battery emergency loads 
the maximum accepted voltage drops for the battery system  
the key minimum testing and inspection periods that ensure an effective emergency supply is ready on 
demand. 

Battery replacement by failure is generally not considered appropriate for batteries supplying safety critical or 
emergency loads that are required to function on demand. Batteries should be replaced before they reach 
their end of life condition. 

Battery fire is a credible event; these hazards (fire hazard and stored energy) should be assessed as part of the 
safety case for the facility. 

Operators should prepare a mitigating emergency response procedure for responding to a battery thermal 
runaway event or battery room fire. The emergency response procedure should cover containing the event, 
firefighting, training, and emergency preparedness drills. 

The legislation 
Schedule 3 of the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 places specific duties on the 
operator of a facility to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that: 

•  any plant, equipment, materials and substances at the facility are safe and without risk to health and 
• 

to implement and maintain systems of work at the facility that are safe and without risk to health. 

Facility operators, employers, and persons in charge of work activities should review their practices for the use 
of battery banks, particularly banks of batteries storing 120 volts DC and above, with regard to the above 
information. 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Alert 61. NOPSEMA safety alerts are 
published at nopsema.gov.au, on the ‘Safety Alerts’ page under the ‘Safety’ tab. 

 

 

 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 

A452884     Rev 0 

04/11/15 

3 of 3 

