 
 
SAFETY ALERT 40 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Risk of Fires from Inverter Drives 

What happened? 
 
The transformer in the thruster circuit for an accommodation support vessel 
caught fire after the internal insulation was damaged by overheating due to the 
effects of harmonic currents introduced by variable frequency drives. 
 

 

 
 
In this incident, the transformers had not been correctly rated. Transformers 
intended for use with inverter drives should be rated for the additional heating 
effects imposed by harmonic currents resulting from the non-linear nature of 
switched and unbalanced loads.  
 
Other precautions include: minimising harmonic current generation by using 
twelve-pulse systems; using a balanced pulse-width modulation 3-phase bridge 
design; monitoring of winding temperatures and phase voltage imbalance, and 
designing the inverter-fed load to be as balanced as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 
 
SAFETY ALERT 40 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Risk of Fires from Inverter Drives 

What could go wrong? 
 
In addition to the obvious risks of fire, in this case there could have also been 
risks associated with the loss of the dynamic positioning of the facility if the 
failures occurred during a safety critical operation. 
 
Key Lessons 
 
The correct design of all equipment for use in circuits where harmonic currents 
are likely is essential to prevent fires. 
 
All transformers fed by inverter drives should be checked to see if they are rated 
for inverter duty, and inspected periodically for the effects of overheating. For 
three-phase transformers, all phases should be loaded uniformly and any 
imbalance leading to phase overheating attended to urgently. 
 
Who is responsible? 
 
Clause 13 of Schedule 3 of the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas 
Storage Act 2006 places duties on suppliers of facilities, plant or substances 
(suppliers) to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that at the time of 
supply the condition of the facility, plant or substance is, when properly used, 
safe and without risk to health.  
 
Suppliers must also take reasonably practicable steps to carry out the research, 
testing and examination necessary to discover, and to eliminate or minimise any 
risk to health and safety that may arise from the use of the equipment they have 
supplied. 
 
Operators of facilities have a duty of care to ensure that plant and equipment at 
the facility are safe, and without risk to health. Maintaining equipment and 
operating it within its design envelope is an important means of meeting this duty.  
 
Contact 
 
For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 40. 

 

Page 2 of 2 

 

