 
SAFETY ALERT 38 

 

 
 
NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Manriding Incident – Carabiner Failure 

 
What happened? 

On a semi-submersible drilling rig, the drill crew had completed rigging up for a 
cement job.  After pressure testing the cement line, a crew member was required 
to open the low-torque valve.  The valve was located at a height of seven metres 
above the rig floor and could only be accessed by using a tugger and man-riding 
harness. 

With the assistance of a roustabout, the person in the man-riding harness 
connected to the wire rope from the man-riding tugger using a carabiner.  
Another crew member then operated the tugger to raise the man-rider up to the 
height of the low-torque valve. 

Operation of the valve involved some physical movement of the man in the riding 
harness.  The man-rider then pushed away from the valve, grasped a cement 
hose with his right arm and signalled to the tugger operator to commence 
lowering.  As lowering began, the carabiner locking gate broke free from the 
carabiner body.  The man-rider became disengaged from the tugger wire rope 
and fell to the rig floor.  Because he was holding the cement hose, this action 
slowed his descent.  He landed feet first and rolled to absorb the fall. 

Examination of the carabiner was carried out by a Materials and Corrosion 
Engineer.  A considerable amount of dirt was found lodged around the latch pin 
and between the latch yokes.  This contamination may have prevented full gate 
closure of the carabiner by stopping the gate sleeve from rotating to lock the 
latch.  This would have left the tensioner spring as the only mechanism holding 
the gate closed. 

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 
SAFETY ALERT 38 

 

 
 
NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Manriding Incident – Carabiner Failure 

 
What went wrong? 

the unlocked position. 

1.  The carabiner was thought to have failed because it was used with the gate in 

2.  The most likely cause of the carabiner being unlocked was dirt inside the gate 

mechanism preventing it from closing fully. 

3.  The carabiner was not rigorously checked for security when it was operated. 

4.  The planned maintenance system did not identify the carabiner on the man-

riding harness as an inspection item. 

 
Key Lessons 

Potential hazards associated with the use of the carabiner had not been 
identified.  The routine planned maintenance instructions did not therefore 
identify the carabiner on the man-riding harness as an item for inspection.  This 
lack of detail allowed the carabiner to be overlooked when inspections were 
carried out. 

The height and position of the side entry sub on the cement stand that included 
the low torque valve was not designed or planned to minimise or eliminate the 
need for man-riding. 

The man-riding procedures were not detailed enough to include rigorous 
inspection and checking of the carabiner for security when it was being operated 
by the user.  This may have allowed the carabiner to be put into use with an 
unlocked gate.  The operator has now replaced the carabiner on the man-riding 
harness with a 4-part shackle.  This shackle is included in the lifting register as 
required in the man-riding procedure and is included in the loose lifting 
equipment inspection colour coding system. 

 

 

Who is responsible? 

(i)  The operator of an offshore facility has a general duty of care under the 

Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 to ensure that 
all work and other activities are safe, and that the risk to the health of people 
is as low as reasonably practicable.  Specifically, the operator must 
implement and maintain a safe system of work for any plant and equipment. 

(ii)  Any person who is in control of any part of a facility or particular work 

carried out at a facility has similar duties to the operator for that part of the 
facility or that particular activity. 

(iii)  Every person at a facility must at all times, take all reasonably practicable 

steps to ensure that by any act or omission, they do not create or increase a 
risk to the health or safety of either themselves or anyone else. 

 
Contact 

For further information, email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 38. 

Page 2 of 2 

 

