 
 
SAFETY ALERT 32 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Maintaining Clear Walkways and Escape Routes 

What happened? 

During a recent inspection of a facility conducting well testing operations, a number of 
temporary flow-lines were found to be run along designated escape routes, blocking 
access and egress to a number of critical areas.  Access to emergency response 
equipment such as life boats, life rafts and portable fire fighting equipment was 
restricted. 

Figures 1 & 2 – Flow lines run along designated escape routes 

In addition, during a coiled tubing operation, equipment was welded in place over a 
number of designated walkways, posing a hazard, particularly in the event of an 
emergency. 

 
Figure 3 – Drum storage in 

escape route 

Figure 4 – Equipment 
installed in walkway 

Figure 5 – Equipment placed on 

designated escape route 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
SAFETY ALERT 32 

   NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

 
Maintaining Clear Walkways and Escape Routes 

Another trend causing concern is the number of NOPSA planned inspections that have 
found escape hatches, typically from warehouses or stores, to be locked or even 
padlocked. 

What could go wrong? 

Blocking access to regular walkways and designated escape routes hinders the escape 
and rescue of people during an emergency.  While most of the obstacles shown in these 
photographs could be avoided by an agile person under typical conditions, emergencies 
often can give rise to atypical conditions such as poor visibility due to smoke and 
disorientation.  Escape routes must also be maintained so that they can be used by 
stretcher parties or  firefighters wearing fire-suits and self contained breathing apparatus. 

In addition, the blocking of walkways prevents the use of trolleys for moving material 
around the rig, tempting people to man-handle heavy items over or around obstacles.  
This can increase the risk of manual handling related incidents and injuries. 

 
Key Lessons 

Walk-ways and escape routes are there for a good reason – keep them clear. 

Frequent and focused area inspections are required to ensure walkways and escape 
routes are not blocked. 

Plans for installation of temporary equipment must take into consideration existing safety 
arrangements.  Operators of facilities should also ensure their clients take the need for 
clear walkways and escape routes into consideration when designing installation plans 
for temporary equipment. 

 
Who is responsible? 

(i) 

(ii) 

The operator of an offshore facility has general duties under the Offshore 
Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 to ensure all work and 
activities are safe and the risk to people is as low as reasonably practicable.  
Specifically, the operator must take all reasonably practicable steps to 
provide and maintain a physical environment that is safe, including in the 
event of an emergency. 

Any titleholder and service contractor who is in control of any part of a facility, 
or any particular work carried out at a facility, has similar duties to those of 
the operator for that part of the facility or that particular work activity. 

 
Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 32. 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 

 

