Safety Alert 46

  

 

Diver Safety – High Pressure Water Jetting Operations 

What happened? 

A saturation diver undertaking High Pressure (HP) Water Jetting Operations sustained a serious 
injury when the retro diffuser tube became detached from the gun allowing the full force of the retro 
jet to penetrate the diver’s arm. 

This accident serves as a reminder of the risks to divers involved with using this type of equipment 
and in particular those risks posed by the retro jet of underwater jetting guns. 

What could go wrong? 

HP water jetting equipment has been in use in the offshore petroleum and diving industries for 
many years and a number of related incidents have occurred.  Many of these were caused by the 
forward lance, however NOPSA is aware of at least two other incidents in which divers operating 
this type of equipment have sustained injuries from the retro jet. 

Whilst there are a number of types and designs of HP water jetting guns for underwater use, they 
all employ a retro diffuser tube to balance the force of the forward jet.  Additionally, some guns 
utilise a shroud which is positioned over the venturi inlet holes to reduce the likelihood of items 
being drawn into the venturi water flow. 

As this type of equipment requires the retro jet to be necessarily positioned close to the body of the 
diver operating the gun, the retro diffuser tube is designed to protect the diver from the retro jet and 
dissipate the energy by allowing surrounding seawater to enter through machined holes in the retro 
diffuser tube.  The retro diffuser tube should be designed such that the exit wash from the tube is 
no longer of a velocity that can cause harm to the diver or equipment (umbilicals for example). 

Underwater HP water jetting guns are subjected to a number of dynamic forces which act on safety 
critical components including the retro tube.  The retro diffuser tube is the only control barrier 
protecting the diver operating the gun from the retro jet, therefore great care is required to ensure 
this barrier is appropriately designed, tested and is functioning correctly. 

Injuries caused by HP water jets are typically serious with high risk of infection due to injection of 
debris and other water borne contaminants.  This is a particular consideration for divers in 
saturation who will have to complete lengthy decompression before they have full access to 
medical intervention.  

 

 

 

 

 

A164934      11 April 2011 

Page 1 of 2 

nopsa.gov.au

Safety Alert 46

  

 

Diver Safety – High Pressure Water Jetting Operations 

 

Key Lessons: 

Prior to using HP water jetting equipment NOPSA strongly recommends thorough checks are 
carried out by competent persons to ensure that the associated risks are reduced to a level that is 
as low as reasonably practicable. 

Whilst not a complete list, those considering use of such equipment should ensure that: 

  The manufacturer’s operating instructions and recommendations are detailed within 

documentation that is held on site with the equipment; 

  The equipment is assembled and used in accordance with the manufacturer’s operating 

instructions and recommendations; 

  The design of equipment used is appropriate for the intended use and has been rigorously 

tested and proven before use; 

  All components, including the retro diffuser tube and venturi shroud (if fitted) are correctly 

assembled and secured in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions; 

  The equipment is inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s 

instructions, supplemented with regular inspections to check for signs of: 

  physical damage and wear; and 

  erosion, especially on the inner wall of retro tube and around the venturi holes.  (Grit 
and other debris resulting from the activity can be entrained into the retro tube via the 
venturi holes, giving rise to erosion potential). 

Operators of facilities are reminded that they have a duty to take all reasonably practicable steps to 
provide and maintain equipment that is safe and without risk to health. 

Diving contractors are similarly reminded that they have the responsibility to take all necessary 
steps to provide and maintain equipment that reduces risks to the safety and health of divers to as 
low as reasonably practicable.  

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 46. 

 

 

 

 

A164934      11 April 2011 

Page 2 of 2 

nopsa.gov.au

