  

SAFETY ALERT 21 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Risks in facility build quality and project handover  

 

What happened? 
Numerous hydrocarbon release incidents occurred during the start up and early phase of 
operations for a new facility. These incidents caused production losses and increased 
risk to people on board.  

The incidents clearly demonstrate the need for a robust project management system 
(PMS) during a project. The PMS for this project did not adequately cover the project 
specifications, material selection, quality assurance, punch listing1 and formal 
acceptance at project handover. The following is a summary of some of the failures that 
occurred: 

1.  Deficiencies in the make-up of pipe flanges and components. These deficiencies 

included: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  unevenly torqued stud bolts in high pressure gas lift and gas compression piping; 

incorrect sized studs found in a gas sampling spool; 

loose body plugs found in gas compression system Shut Down Valve (SDV); 

incompatible piping system materials; 

leakage found in a pilot valve for a Pressure Safety Valve (PSV); 

•  no traceable records for repairs conducted during the project. 

2.  Instrument tubing failures included: 

•  cracked stainless steel tubing in a high pressure gas system transmitter due to 

poor construction quality and practices; 

•  other failures due to a combination of over tightening, vibration fatigue and the 

tubing material not conforming to the specification. 

3.  Piping system punch list deficiencies included: 

•  shipping line stops left in the small bore fuel gas piping connected to the high 

pressure flare header. This caused excessive stress loading in the piping which 
eventually caused the pipe to fail; 

•  numerous spring supports left un-commissioned in the turret piping downstream 

of the swivel stacks. These were discovered after a period of production. 

What went wrong? 
All of these incidents resulted in gas releases. The most significant incident resulted in 
the loss of the high pressure flare header which is a safety critical system. This was 
caused by the failure of the fuel gas piping. 

The following project management failures contributed to or failed to prevent the 
occurrence of these incidents. These failures included: 

 
                                                

1 System punch listing is a compilation of system deficiencies and / or incomplete work to be addressed by a 
project team or an operation team. Punch lists are generated based on site verification at project handover. 

 

Page 1 of 3 

 

  

SAFETY ALERT 21 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Risks in facility build quality and project handover  

the required specifications and engineering standards were not established for 
equipment packages and equipment items; 

the quality control and commissioning checks were not effective. This process 
should have identified any defects before the handover. Examples of this 
included: 

- 

- 

- 

‘as-built’ piping system line walks were not checked against the piping design 
intent using both piping isometric and stress isometric drawings; 

the commissioning checks did not reveal some system defects. These 
included defects in the mechanical completions, the presence of faulty parts, 
incorrectly made up flange joints and the presence of shipping restraints; 

the handover process between the project management and operations was 
inadequate  regarding the keeping of records, the documentation of the 
management of change and the documentation of repairs carried out during 
the project. 

Key Lessons 
While there are lessons specific to each of the incidents that occurred, the following key 
lessons were common to all of the incidents: 

• 

the project specifications must be established and approved at the start of the 
project in order to define the system requirements in sufficient detail; 

•  quality control inspections must be thorough during the installation and 

commissioning phases of the project. These inspections should include a 
comprehensive system of punch listing and rigorous system of verification and 
close-outs. These inspections will verify that the piping and equipment meet the 
approved specifications and the design intent; 

•  every field change or repair made during the construction, installation and 

commissioning phases of the project must be traceable and executed as an 
approved change or as an authorised work pack; 

•  commissioning and start-up procedures must be thorough. The procedures 

should enable verification that all pre-operational supports or restraints such as 
shipping locks are released from their spring supports or have been removed -  
piping system responses should be regularly monitored both during and after 
start up; 

•  commissioning and start-up activities should include, but not limited to, a 

thorough process of control-loop tuning and optimization of operational 
parameters that, if not addressed, may lead to loss of containment from flanges, 
mechanical seals and small-bore fittings; 

the operations workforce should be engaged as early as possible in the project to 
enhance their familiarisation with the facility and its systems. They should also be 
involved in the development of operational procedures; 

the operations workforce should be involved in the commissioning activities. In 
particular, they should be involved in the quality checks carried out after each 
system has been completed. 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

Page 2 of 3 

 

  

SAFETY ALERT 21 

NATIONAL OFFSHORE PETROLEUM SAFETY AUTHORITY 

Risks in facility build quality and project handover  

Facility operators, and persons in charge of work activities for the relevant stage of the 
life of the facility, should review their work practices and the handover arrangements to 
ensure that the facility is safe (will be safe) and without risk to health.  

 

 

Contact 

For further information email alerts@nopsa.gov.au and quote Alert 21. 

 

Page 3 of 3 

 

