 

 
 
 
 
April  30,  2013                                                                                                                                                                                       03-13b 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Surge Protective Devices Onboard Vessels 

(correction with additional information) 

to 

 
We’ve  all  seen  them  and  used  them.  Surge  protective  devices  (SPDs),  more  commonly  known  as 
surge protectors or power strips help protect our expensive electronic devices from being damaged 
from excessive currents and allow us to simultaneously deliver power to multiple devices. This safety 
alert addresses the use of certain electrical protection devices onboard vessels and the inherent risks 
they  may  cause.  Most  commercially  available  SPDs  are  designed  for  use  ashore  and  will  interrupt 
only  the  hot  conductor  when  a  surge  occurs.  What  does  that  mean  for  the  ship  owner/operator?  It 
means that while these devices may provide protection in our homes and offices, these same devices 
may be a fire risk onboard vessels.  
 
A marine casualty investigation of two separate 
stateroom fires onboard a U.S. Flag Container 
ship revealed that the sources of the fires were 
attributed  to  the  use  of  SPDs  plugged  into  a 
lighting circuit. It was discovered that a ground 
had  developed  on  another  circuit  that  was 
connected 
the  same  distribution  panel 
providing power to the staterooms. This ground 
created  an  imbalance  of  voltage  between  the 
two  power  conductors  supplying  the  SPDs 
which caused excessive currents, overheating, 
and subsequently, a fire. In this instance, even 
if the SPDs automatically tripped as designed, 
only  one  power  conductor  would  have  been 
secured  while  the  other  would  continue  to 
provide power, possibly shorting to the device’s ground wire and the structure of the vessel.  
 
For shipboard applications, it is critical for a device to interrupt both power conductors. Underwriters 
Lab Standard - UL Marine 1449 – addresses this issue and applies to the use of SPDs.  
 
The  Coast  Guard  recommends  that  vessel  Owners,  Operators,  Class  Society  Surveyors,  Insurers, 
and  other  inspection  personnel  examine  the  risks  associated  with  the  use  of  SPDs  aboard  their 
vessels,  and  if  necessary  ensure  their  organizations  have  policies  and  procedures  relating  to  their 
use.  Vessels should have defined procedures for checking the condition and grounding capabilities 
of  personal/portable  electrical  equipment,  and  trained  shipboard  personnel  should  be  assigned  to 
check and approve all SPDs in use or brought on board for compatibility with the vessel’s electrical 
distribution  system  prior  to  use.  Routine  checks  of  switchboard  and  distribution  system  120  VAC 
ground  detection  systems  are  necessary  to  detect  the  presence  of  grounds  that  may  cause  similar 
circumstances with non-marine type SPDs. These recommendations are not mandated rather just an 
advisory based on lessons learned from the casualty. 
 

Page 1 

Additional Technical Information: 
 

 

•  This safety alert only applies to vessels with alternating current power systems and may be most likely applicable 
to  larger  industrial  and  commercial  vessels.    It  relates  to  different  manners  in  which  power  is  generated, 
transformed and supplied throughout the vessel. 

•  There  is  no  official  Underwriters  Laboratory  standard  for  Marine  Surge  Protective  Devices  despite  numerous 

retailers advertising “UL Marine 1449.” 

 
The  recommendations  on  page  one  of  this  document  remain.  Ideally,  if  there  is  excessive  use of  power  strips onboard 
there  may  be  a  need  to  consider  the  installation  of  additional  permanent  components  such  as  distribution  panels, 
breakers, cabling or receptacles.  An SPD should be - 

removed from service if it is hot to touch, 

•  only permitted for use onboard once approved by a trained crewmember, 
• 
•  unplugged when not in use, 
• 
• 
•  prevented from use in excessively humid or moist environments, 
•  provided air circulation and not covered with carpet or other items, and 
• 

regularly inspected for damage or wear, 
limited to one SPD per single duplex receptacle outlet and never daisy chained, 

checked to ensure that all plugs are fully engaged. 

 
The  primary  concern  of  this  alert  is  to  ensure  electrical  protection  devices  such  as  SPDs  operate  correctly  with  the 
manner in which the 120 volt receptacle circuitry onboard the vessel is wired.  Receptacle circuitry may be wired in Delta 
or WYE configurations. 

 
Using a voltmeter, a marine electrical professional will note that a Delta wired 
circuit will read the voltage across the terminals as shown in the image on the 
right.  The Delta configuration has two hot leads one at +/-60 VAC, the other at 
+/- 60 VAC, simultaneously to provide the 120 VAC potential.  Here lies the 
problem with inexpensive and older SPDs that only disconnect one “hot” 
terminal lead.  The other “hot” terminal remains hot if the circuit breaker 
supplying the receptacle and SPD does not trip. 
 

 
 
A  marine  electrical  professional  using  a  voltmeter  on  a  WYE  wired  circuit  will 
read voltage across the terminals as shown in the image on the left. For a WYE 
configuration 120 VAC is established between the hot terminal and the neutral 
terminal and the hot terminal and the ground terminal of the receptacle. 
 
 
 

 
Owner  /  operators  may  wish  to  purchase  equipment  meeting  MIL  Performance  Specification  MIL-PZRF-32167A  which 
incorporates  ASTM  F1507  (Standard  Specifications  for  Surge  Suppressors  for  Shipboard  Use)  and  UL  1449  (Safety 
Standards for Surge Protective Devices). Further, for informational purpose only, US Navy and CG vessels use SPDs with 
the following National Supply Number (NSN) 6150-01-362-7192. 
 
It should be noted that related issues (mismatches between Delta or WYE systems) have been reported with 120 VAC 
Uninterrupted Power Supplies purchased ashore and used onboard vessels.  Such devices should be selected to match 
the power supply configuration.    
 
Owner  /  operators  who  are  not  familiar  with  these  issues  or  have  remaining  questions  should  consult  their  technical 
departments  or  a  marine  electrical  professional.      These  recommendations  are  an  advisory  only  and  not  mandatory.  
Special  thanks  to  personnel  from  FOSS  Maritime, Keystone  Shipping and  the  Philmont  Group  for sharing  their  insights 
and policy pertaining to this matter. 
 
This  document  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international  safety, 
operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis,  United  States 
Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  Questions can be addressed to the sender.                                Page 2                     

