  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 10, 2014 
Washington, DC 
 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 14-14 

MODIFICATIONS MADE TO PILOT LADDER MAGNETIC SECURING DEVICES LEAD TO ACCIDENTS 

DESIGNED FOR A REASON – HULL MAGNETS 

PROPER  USE OF HULL MAGNETS 

This alert raises awareness as to the importance of not modifying equipment or components from 
their  intended  design  or  operation.    Recently,  a  State  Pilot  suffered  a  concussion  as  he  was 
boarding  a  vessel  via  its  pilot  ladder.    The  primary  cause  of  the  accident  was  an  improperly 
modified embarkation ladder hull magnet that disconnected from the ship’s hull and struck the Pilot 
on the head. 
 
Unfortunately,  this  was  not  an  isolated  incident. 
Additional  incidents  with  injuries  have  occurred 
on  other  vessels  at  several  different  ports.    In 
each  of  those  instances  the  hull  magnets  were 
modified  prior  to  the  accident.    Moreover,  in  all 
cases,  after  restoring  the  hull  magnets  to  their 
original  design  no 
further  problems  were 
experienced. 
 
Hull  magnets  are  easy  to  operate  devices  and  when  positioned  correctly,  provide  substantial 
holding force.  The handle of the magnet is also a lever and enables easy release from the hull of 
the vessel.  The intended proper use of the magnets is shown in the above image.  In the incidents 
where  the  magnets  unexpectedly  detached  from  the  hull,  only  one  securing  magnet  was  used 
between  the  rails  of  the  ladder  along  with  equipment  alterations  that  deviated  from  the 
manufacturer’s design (see image below). 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that 
vessel  owners/operators  refrain  from  modifying 
embarkation  equipment.    In  addition,  operators 
should regularly inspect existing vessel boarding 
equipment  and  return  improper  modifications  
back  to  the  manufacturer’s  original  design. 
Pilots  are  encouraged  to  consult  with  their 
appropriate  associations  to  determine  if  any 
additional  precautions  should  be  taken  as  part 
of  their  normal  boarding  practices  and  this 
identified risk.  
 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirements.    It  was  developed  by  the  Washington 
State  Pilots  Association,  Coast  Guard  Sector  Puget  Sound  and  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty  Analysis,  Washington  DC.    For  questions  or  concerns,  please  email  hqs-pf-fldr-cg-
inv@uscg.mil.   

Remote release device 
 
      Handle         

Noted Modifications - NOT RECOMMENDED 

both sides of pilot 
ladder ropes. 

  Bracket used to secure 

 

 

