  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 16, 1998 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 04-98 
 

LIMIT SWITCHES AND GRAVITY LIFE BOAT DAVITS 

The Coast Guard publication, "Manual for Lifeboatmen, Able Seamen, and Qualified Members of 
Engine  Department”  (CG-175)  gave  the  following  instructions  for  hoisting  lifeboats  under  gravity 
davits:  

On  boats  handled  with  gravity  davits,  the  boat  is  hoisted  to  a  position  where  the 
tricing lines can be made fast. It is next lowered to the embarkation deck where men 
in boat can get out, It is then hove up to the stowed position, using the hand cranks 
for the last 12 inches or more. In the stowed position. men can get back in to pass 
gripes, replace ridgepole and cover, etc. 

 

In a recent report of a casualty concerning the failure of a wire-rope fall on a gravity lifeboat davit, 
the  investigating  officer  stated  that,  "While  securing  port  lifeboat,  utilizing  a  gravity  davit  system, 
the limit switches apparently failed to operate properly, causing the boat to be hauled up too far, 
resulting in the after lifeboat fall parting."  

In  reality,  the  Coast  Guard  recommended  hoisting  procedure  quoted  above  is  telling  shipboard 
personnel  not  to  trust  the  limit  switches  installed  on  the  trackways  of  gravity  davits.  The  crew  is 
strongly  advised  to  hand  crank  the  boat  for  the  last  12  inches  of  its  travel  up  the  trackways  and 
thus  avoid  any  mishaps  that  could  occur  from  inoperative  limit  switches.  During  long  periods  at 
sea,  these  switches  frequently  become  water-soaked  and  short  circuited;  their  failure  to  operate 
can occur when least expected. The replacement of the lifeboat which followed the above casualty 
could have been avoided if the boat had been hand cranked for its last 12 inches of movement up 
the trackways. 

This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil 

 

 

1 

