  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 15, 2002 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 11-02 
 

TELEVISON ANTENNAE INTERFERENCE WITH GPS 

UPDATE 12/16/02 Please note corrected Shakespeare Corporation model numbers below. 

It has come to the attention of the U.S. Coast Guard and Federal Communications Commission 
that certain consumer electronics-grade active VHF/UHF marine television antennas are causing 
operational degradation in the performance of Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers. This 
interference may be realized as a display of inaccurate position information or a complete loss of 
GPS receiver acquisition and tracking ability. The interference is not limited to the GPS equipment 
onboard the vessel with the installed active marine television antennae. There have been reports 
of interference occurring on other vessels and installations operating up to 2000 feet away from 
vessels using such antennas. 

In one particular case, the interference caused the position of the vessel as displayed on the 
electronic chart to move erratically and dramatically often across large expanses of land. As can be 
expected, various data displays indicated erroneous information such as excessive speeds. In 
these instances the problem would occasionally correct itself while at other times required resetting 
the system. To the vessel's crew these annoyances were frustrating and caused concerns that 
perhaps less obvious inaccuracies were occurring. Ultimately this affected their confidence in the 
performance of the GPS and Electronic Chart Display and Information System.If you are 
experiencing recurring outages or degradation of your GPS receiver operation you should perform 
an on-off test of your TV antenna. If turning off the power to the antenna results in improvement in 
the GPS receiver performance, the antenna may be the source of interference in the GPS band. In 
that case, you should contact the manufacturer of the antenna and identify the symptoms.  

If the test is not positive and the GPS interference persists, contact the watchstander at the Coast 
Guard Navigation Information Service at nisws@navcen.uscg.mil / 703.313.5900.Antennae models 
identified during investigations of GPS interference: 

TDP (Tandy Distribution Products) Electronics - MINI STATE Electronic Amplified UHF/VHF TV 
Antenna - Models 5MS740, 5MS750, 5MS921  
Radio Shack Corporation - Long Range Amplified Omni Directional TV Antenna - Model 15-1624 
Shakespeare Corporation - SeaWatch - Models 2040/Code Date 02A00, 2050/Code Date 03A00 
(Code Dates are found on the antenna power supply.) 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

1 

