 

         

 
 
January 9, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

   Alert 02-14 

 

TANK SAMPLING DANGERS / H2S Threshold Limit Change 

 
This Safety Alert serves as a reminder to Coast Guard (CG) personnel and the maritime community 
of  potential  dangers  during  sampling  of  cargo  tanks.  During  a  recent  Port  State  Control  (PSC)  tank 
vessel examination, a CG member was exposed to a dangerous concentration of Hydrogen Sulfide 
(H2S) gas and suffered a serious injury.  
 
The  exposure  occurred  during  a  tank  vessel  exam  onboard  a 
tank  vessel  carrying  Grade  E  Sour  Crude.  A    PSC  team 
requested a ship's crew member check cargo tank oxygen levels 
using the ship’s portable gas meter. The crew member accessed 
the cargo tank via a deck sounding valve similar to the adjacent 
photo.  When  the  valve  was  opened  the  pressurized  cargo  tank 
atmosphere escaped releasing inert gas and H2S vapors. 
 
During  the  evolution  the  personal  gas  meters  of  two  individuals 
involved (one CG and one crew) alarmed for H2S. The CG officer 
whose alarm sounded was standing 1–2 feet downwind from the 
sounding  valve.  Within  days  the  CG  officer  developed  severe 
exposure  symptoms  consistent  with  H2S  exposure.  The  other 
two  CG  officers  involved  were  standing  upwind.  Afterward,  one 
reported experiencing a minor headache. 
 
OSHA notes that H2S is a colorless, flammable gas with a “rotten egg” smell that occurs naturally in 
crude  petroleum.    Even  at  low  concentrations  this  heavier-than-air  gas  can  irritate  the  eyes,  nose, 
throat  and  respiratory  system  with  effects  delayed  for  hours  or  days.  At  higher  concentrations, 
nausea,  vomiting,  headaches,  dizziness,  unconsciousness  or  death  may  occur.    While  the  initial 
“rotten  egg”  odor  is  present,  an  individual  may  lose  the  ability  to  smell  that  gas  after  becoming 
exposed. Personal monitoring equipment is, therefore, vital to protect against exposure. An alarm on 
H2S  constitutes  an  acute  exposure  and  should  trigger  immediate  evacuation  and  initiation  of  acute 
exposure procedures including medical attention. 
 
Prior  to  using  portable  gas  monitoring  equipment,  personnel  should  familiarize  themselves  with 
ISGOTT  Section  11.8  and  safe  work  practices  for  conducting  or  witnessing  these  tests.  ISGOTT 
recommends when sampling tanks personnel should stand perpendicular to the wind to avoid being 
downwind  or  upwind  and  creating  eddies.  When  monitoring  cargo  tank  atmospheres,  all  personnel 
should exercise diligence and great care. In all cases, personnel should completely assess the risks, 
to include the cargo type, tank pressure, venting arrangements, wind direction/speed and condition of 
the testing equipment. When H2S is suspected to be present, ISGOTT Section 2.3.6.5 recommends 
that a self contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) be worn if it is necessary to breach the integrity of 
the cargo system and if a vapor free atmosphere cannot be guaranteed.   
 
 

1

 
The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists recently reduced the H2S dangerous 
Threshold Limit Value from 2 parts per million (ppm) to 1 ppm.    
 
As  a  result  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  those  involved  in  cargo  tank  sampling  or 
atmosphere testing: 
 

•  Be familiar with and adhere to ISGOTT safe work practices. 
•  Assess personnel risks. 
•  Don appropriate personal protection equipment including gas monitoring detectors, respirator 

or SCBA. 
If gas monitoring detectors are used ensure: 

• 

o  detectors are maintained and properly calibrated 
o  alarm settings values are properly set  

•  Be aware and familiar with the hazards of the cargos involved as well as exposure indicators 

and emergency response procedures. 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Traveling 
Inspectors,  Washington,  D.C.  For  additional  information  contact    Commander  Thomas  Griffitts: 
Thomas.A.Griffitts@uscg.mil. 
 

 

2

