  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 3, 1996 (reformatted) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

MACHINERY HAZARDS 

      Safety Alert 01-96 
 

On August 23rd, 1995 a crewman on a fishing vessel operating from Portland, Maine was seriously injured 
when his right arm was partially severed during haul back of the trawl net. The accident occurred when the 
crewman's arm was caught between the gallows frame and a stiffening flange on the net reel while the net 
reel  was  being  backed  off.  The  resulting  injury  shattered  the  bone  just  above  the  elbow  and  left  the  arm 
partially severed.  

stiffening 

The  net  reel  on  this  vessel  had 
twelve 
flanges 
arranged like spokes on a wheel 
that  were  approximately 
inches  deep  and  cleared  the  gallows  framing 
by less than one half an inch. As the net reel 
was within reach of the main deck, this hazard 
should have been guarded to prevent injury.  

three 

Operators  of  commercial  fishing  vessels  are 
requested  to  examine  their  vessels  to  insure 
that  this  particular  hazard  does  not 
exist  onboard  their  vessels  as 
well.  Also  noted  during 
this 
accident  was  the  inadequacy  of 
the  first  aid  kit  onboard  the  vessel. 
Unlike shore based factories and businesses fishing vessels may encounter situations where persons are 
injured and medical assistance is hours away. Even vessel operators with professionally prepared first aid 
kits  should  insure  that  their  vessels  are  equipped  with  extra  first  aid  equipment,  especially  bandages  and 
gauze pads to control serious bleeding.  

Coast Guard assistance is available to any commercial fishing vessel to help determine if exposed hazards 
exist. For further information contact the Portland Coast Guard Marine Safety Office at (207) 780-3251 ext. 
115. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

