  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 8, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

TUG AND BARGE ADVISORY 

      Safety Alert 06-96 
 

During  the  summer  of  1995  a  recreational  boater  narrowly  escaped  serious  injury  following  the 
collision of his vessel with a tug and barge departing Portland, Maine. In that accident, the tug was 
towing a barge astern on a single tow wire at night. As the tug and barge headed for sea, the tug 
was  setting  the  barge  out  on  a  long  tow  wire,  a  practice  which  is  normal  and  necessary  for  the 
safety of the tug boat's crew.   The recreational boat saw the tug, but did not realize it was towing a 
barge.  The  recreational  boat  waited  for  the  tug  to  pass,  and  then,  at  a  slow  speed,  tried  to  pass 
immediately  behind  the  tug.  It  then  struck  the  towing  cable,  was  immediately  pulled  down  by  the 
stern, and was swamped. Accidents of this type are often fatal; in this case, only the slow speed of 
the recreational vessel and a quick rescue prevented the incident from becoming a catastrophe.  

 

Tugs and barges comprise a vital component of this nation's transportation system, and each year 
deliver  hundreds  of  thousands  of  barrels  of  petroleum  and  other  vital  products  to  Portland  and 
other New England ports. While their passage through New England waters may seem routine to 
many,  these  vessels  are  actually  quite  difficult  to  maneuver  in  ports  and  other  coastal  waters, 
especially when the tug boat is setting a barge out on a low wire or making up for transit into port.  
 
Recreational  boaters  can  do  their  part  in  port  and  harbor  safety  by  recognizing  the  location  of 
shipping  channels  and  remaining  well  clear  of  large  commercial  traffic,  especially  tug  and  barge 
systems.  All  mariners  should  be  well  aware  of  the  location  of  shipping  channels,  anchorages, 
commercial  piers,  draw  bridges  and  other  congested  port  areas.  Please  recognize  that  tugs  and 
barges and other large commercial vessels need plenty of room to maneuver and prepare for sea 
and/or berthing. Also, these large vessels can require considerable water to navigate without going 
aground. It is easy to underestimate how many areas in a harbor these large vessels can't go.  

         Do you know what these lights mean? Do you know where the tug and barge are?  

 

1 

The system works better if we all know what we're talking about. 

 
Be safe, take a safe boating course. Call 1-800-336-BOAT for more information. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

