 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 
 Safety Alert 02-16 

April 4, 2016 
Washington, DC                                            Worn Thin 

Vibration Abrasion, a “Short” Summation 

TELLTALE 

WEAR MARKS 

 
This  Safety  Alert  addresses  causal  factors  related  to  a  temporary  loss  of  electrical  power  that 
occurred onboard a tow boat with a tow.  In this case, electrical power was restored quickly by a 
standby  generator,  and  the  vessel  and  tow  remained  under  control  throughout  the  event.  
Furthermore,  the  crew  quickly  identified  the  problem 
and took appropriate steps to prevent recurrence. 
 
The  casualty  involved  a  diesel-driven  generator,  which 
grounded  out  and  tripped  off  line  when  one  of  the 
primary  leads  exiting  the  generator  housing  chafed 
against  its  steel  enclosure.    Investigators  determined 
that  other  vessels  operated  by  the  same  company  had 
similar generators and wiring arrangements.  Inspection 
of those generators showed similar signs of chafing and 
abrasion, but the wiring had not yet reached the point of 
failure. 
 
Corrective action and repairs were quickly taken on the 
worn  areas.  The  simple  fix  involved  wrapping  the  worn 
areas  with  friction  or  electrical  tape.    Additional  rubber 
protectors were also installed and held in place with tie 
wraps. 
 
Vibrational  loosening  of  diesel  engine  components  is  a 
well  known  causal  factor  in  fuel  oil  spray  fires.    While 
this  situation  is  different  than  a  failed  fuel  line,  the 
unsafe  condition  leading  to  the  failure  is  similar.  Both 
circumstances  serve  as  a  reminder  for  personnel  to 
consider  what  could  occur  as  a  result  of  vibration.  
Inspect at-risk areas such as piping systems connected 
to  the  engine,  engine  mounts,  pipe  clamps,  wire  bundles,  brackets,  and  areas  where  connected 
components  pass  through  decks  or  overheads.    Areas  that  house  the  generator’s  larger  leads 
should only be inspected for insulation wear by qualified personnel. 
 
As  a  result  of  this  casualty  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  vessel  operators  with 
similar  generators  on  board  consider  having  a  qualified  individual  inspect  the  casing  area  where 
the  winding  leads  exit  the  generator  frame  for  similar  wear.    All  electrical  safety  precautions 
including lock out / tag out procedures should be taken prior to beginning work. 
 
This  safety  alert  was  developed  by  the  Coast  Guard  Headquarters  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty  Analysis  with  assistance  from  Prevention  personnel  of  Coast  Guard  Sector  Lower 
Mississippi River and the Eighth Coast Guard District.  Questions and comments may be sent to: 
HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

RUBBER CHAFING PROTECTORS 

 

