 

                      

 
December 21, 2010 
Washington, DC 

 

 

   Alert 10(a) -10 

WRONG DIRECTIONS: A RECIPE FOR FAILURE 

 

Safety Alert 1 of 2 

 
This  safety  alert  addresses  critical  concerns  uncovered  during  an  ongoing  marine  casualty 
investigation  and  should  be  of  vital  interest  to  Ship  Builders,  Classification  Societies,  Owner  / 
Operators and others involved with vessel operations. 
 
A  machinery  space  fire  onboard  a  relatively  new  vessel  was  effectively  responded  to  and 
extinguished by the vessel’s quick response team firefighters using portable extinguishing equipment.  
However, before it was declared completely extinguished and approximately five hours after the fire 
started, the master of the vessel made the decision to release CO2 from the vessel’s fixed firefighting 
system.    It  failed  to  operate  as  designed.  Subsequently,  crewmembers  were  unable  to  activate  it 
manually and CO2 was never directed into the machinery space.  
 
While  the  casualty  investigation  remains  ongoing,  the  following  issues  were  discovered  that  could 
have  negatively  affected  the  crew’s  emergency  response  and  may  have  contributed  to  the  CO2 
system failure. 
 

•  Shipyard commissioning test procedures appear to differ from procedures documented in the 
vessel’s  Firefighting  Instruction  Manual  (FIM).    Commissioning  procedures  indicate  that  the 
discharge line selection to a specific protected zone should be made prior to releasing the gas 
contrary to the directions in the FIM.  

 
•  The FIM refers extensively to a Control Panel (left following image) that differs vastly from the 

one onboard the vessel (right following image). 

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

•  The  FIM  states  that the  CO2  Release  station  is on  the  Starboard  side of  the  vessel  when  In 

•  The  FIM  incorrectly  uses  the  word  “Pull”  when  it  should  read  “Turn”  in  reference  to  the 

fact it is located on the Port side. 
 

operations of valves. 
 

•  The FIM contains the following confusing language “Once the fire has been extinguished make 
sure that the temperature has decreased before investigate the area same time is needed to 
wait hours.” 
 

•  The  FIM  references  elements  of  an  Emergency  Shut  Down  (E.S.D.)  graphic  on  numerous 

occasions.  However, the graphic display was not found on the vessel. 
 

•  The FIM contains photographs of the internals of the CO2 release stations that appear to differ 

from actual CO2 release stations onboard the vessel. 
 

•  The  CO2  release  stations  installed  on  the  vessel  have  instructional  placards  that  refer  to 

elements of a completely different control panel then the one used onboard the vessel. 
 
 
 

•  Shipyard  piping  schematics  and  drawings  do  not 
appear to match the actual installation. The schematic 
at  the right  shows  the  “A  valve”  for  the  Aft  Machinery 
Space  in  the  center  position  vice  the  bottom  position 
as it is installed on the vessel. 
 

  
 
 
 
Because  of  these  and  other  issues,  the  United  States  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that 
Vessel  Builders  /  Shipyards,  Classification  Societies,  Insurers, Owners  /  Operators,  System  Service 
Personnel, and others involved with these systems: 
 

•  Ensure  that  all  supporting  documentation,  piping  schematics,  plans,  manuals,  component 
labeling  and  instructions  are  consistent  with  each  other  and  relevant  to  the  systems, 
equipment, and components installed onboard the vessel. 

 
Developed by the U.S. Coast Guard Headquarter’s Office of Investigations and Analysis, Washington, 
DC.  Questions may be addressed to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil. 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

2

