  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 3, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 13-14 
 

WHAT YOU CAN’T SEE - CAN HURT YOU! 

Corrosion of “Duck” Boat Bilge Pump Discharge Piping 

rendering 

failure  of 

 
During  a  recent  Coast  Guard  inspection  of  an  amphibious  passenger  vessel  /  DUKW  (“duck”)  boat,  a 
marine inspector discovered water back-flowing into the vessel’s bilge while testing the vessel’s bilge pump 
system.  An expanded inspection of the system revealed a severely wasted and holed section of the steel 
bilge piping leading vertically to the overboard bilge discharge port.  After inspecting the remaining fleet of 
six vessels, the same problem was discovered, in various degrees of severity, on four other vessels.   
 
The 
this  piping 
creates  an  extremely  unsafe 
condition  by 
the 
vessel’s bilge pumping system 
ineffective. 
the 
wasted  section  of  piping  is 
hidden  behind  inner  sidewalls 
within  the  passenger  seating 
section, 
the  problem  can 
persist and evade detection by 
the vessel owner or operator.   
 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  encourages  owners,  operators,  and  other  persons  involved  with  the 
inspection of these types of vessels to: 
 

Because 

 

Immediately  trace  out  and  inspect  the  entire  bilge  piping  system  for 
wastage  or  deterioration  of  metal  bilge  piping,  check  the  condition  of  all 
hoses, hose clamps, supports and make repairs as needed. 

 
  Make the inspections of these concealed components part of the vessel’s 

overall routine inspection process. 

 
  Consider installing an access plate on the inner panel at the area of the 
discharge piping so that the piping is easily accessible for inspection and 
maintenance. (See image at right) 

 

 

Inform  the  appropriate  Coast  Guard  personnel  if  the  system  piping  has 
changed  significantly  or 
in  any  way  that  may  require  regulatory 
notification, oversight or guidance for permanent repair solutions. 

 
This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve 
any  domestic  or  international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement. 
Developed  by  Sector  San  Francisco  and  distributed  by 
the  Office  of 
Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.    For  questions  or  concerns  please  email 
Michael.P.Devolld@uscg.mil or hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

