 
           

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

July 9, 2014 
Washington, DC                           BATTERY WEIGHT VARIES 

 

 

 

       LL 02-14 

Use proper replacement parts on all Emergency Equipment. 

light’s 

labeled 

the  water 

This  serves  as  a  reminder  for  vessel  owner  operators  and  all  mariners  to  use  only  the  proper 
replacement parts for Emergency Equipment.  Imagine being in an emergency situation in the water 
clinging for your life to a ring buoy while rescuers pass you by unnoticed because the electric water 
light attached to the ring buoy had sunk.  Hopefully, that scenario will never occur. 
 
While  conducting  an  annual  inspection  a  Coast 
Guard inspector picked up a ring buoy’s water light 
and  noticed  that  it  felt  heavier  than  usual.    The 
master  of  the  vessel  was  notified  and  he  then 
agreed to perform a float test.  When the ring buoy 
and  its  water  light  were  tossed  into  the  water,  the 
water  light  instantly  sank  about  5’  to  the  end  of  its 
painter.    Apparently,  the  last  time  the  battery  was 
replaced, a heavier battery than the manufacturer’s 
recommended  battery  was  used.    This  occurred 
despite 
instructions 
regarding the correct battery type. 
 
This 
immersed 
automatically  rights  itself  and  activates  a  flashing  / 
strobing  light  that  is  capable  of  operating  for  up  to 
60 hours using a 6-volt lantern battery. Water lights 
by design need to float upright for maximum visibility. The 6-volt lantern battery provides the ballast 
for these lights.  Most off the shelf lantern sized batteries will likely be the exact same size but they 
may have varying weights.  It is imperative that only the manufacturer’s recommended batteries are 
used.   If not heavy enough the water light may float on its side, if too heavy it will sink. If there are 
any doubts as to the weight of the battery impacting the buoyancy of the water light, test it by placing 
it  in  water.    These  devices  are  approved  under  46  CFR  161.010  and  any  deviation  from  the  parts 
approved for that equipment could negate its effectiveness and approval.   
 
The Coast Guard reminds vessel owners operators and others performing inspections on emergency 
equipment to be aware of this concern.  Always follow specific manufacturer recommendations when 
replacing batteries or other components of safety equipment.  When possible maintain awareness to 
counterfeit  replacement  components  and  safety  equipment  at  large.    We’ve  previously  reported  on 
the  hazards  of  counterfeit  safety  products  such  as  Emergency  Escape  Breathing  Devices  or  Hand 
Portable Fire Extinguishers. 
 

sort  of  water 

light  when 

The use of inappropriate replacement parts on Emergency Equipment can kill! 

This Lessons Learned is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic 
or international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis.  For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 
 

 

  

