 

 
 
 
 

December 19, 2017                                                                                                         Safety Alert 13-17 
Washington, DC 

Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

Fixed CO2 Fire Extinguishing Systems 

 

When your hoses aren’t right you might lose the firefight. 

find 

 
Recently,  Coast  Guard  marine  inspectors  discovered 
critical  deficiencies  onboard  a  containership  with  its 
fixed  CO2  fire  extinguishing  system.  The  conditions 
associated  with  the  CO2  system  may  have  prevented 
the system from operating correctly or, if not discovered, 
the  system  may  not  have  operated  at  all  in  an 
emergency situation.  
 
During  the  inspection,  it  was  noted  that  some  of  the 
hoses  which  connected  the  large  CO2  cylinders  to  the 
manifolds  were  wrapped  around 
the  bottle  valve 
handles as shown in photographs A and B.   The bottles 
could  have  been  in  place  for  a  long  period  of  time,  in 
their  original  positions  without  regard  to  the  stresses 
placed  on  the  connecting  hoses.    However,  experts  in 
Fixed CO2 System Servicing have indicated that service 
personnel  routinely 
loose  bottles  which  have 
rotated  over  a  period  of  time.    The  experts  expressed 
that photographs A and B represented extreme cases of 
rotation.    The  service  personnel  also  stated  that  “four 
bottle  deep”  manifold  systems  were  atypical  and  may 
have contributed to an inability to maintain tightness. 
 
These bottles should have been clamped tightly in place 
by  the  use  of  wooden  brackets  as  displayed  in 
photograph C.  Wooden spacers in between the rows of 
bottles can also be used to ensure proper securing of all 
the bottles.  
 
Inspectors  also  found  significant  cracking  of  the  CO2 
discharge hoses which were under tension as shown in 
photograph  D.  This  condition  is  known  as  ozone 
cracking and occurs when very small amounts of ozone 
in  the  atmosphere  interact  with  the  polymers  that 
compose  rubber  products  and  certain  other  elastomers 
when those products are under tension.  
 

  A 

B 

C 

Page | 1 

 

 

Safety Alert 13-17 

 
As  a  result  of  the  inspection  the  vessel  was  detained  until  these  and  other  identified  deficiencies 
identified  were  corrected.    During  a  reinspection  of  the  vessel  to  clear  the  deficiencies,  it  was 
discovered that the servicing organization that replaced  the hoses, installed several new hoses in a 
similar  orientation  that  maintained  excessive  stress  on  the  hoses.    That  issue  was  subsequently 
rectified by rotating the bottles.                                                            
 
In  June  of  2009  the  IMO  released  MSC.1/Cir.1318, 
titled  “GUIDELINES  FOR  THE  MAINTENANCE  AND 
INSPECTIONS  OF  FIXED  CARBON  DIOXIDE  FIRE-
EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.”  It provides the minimum 
recommended level of maintenance and inspections for 
fixed  carbon  dioxide  fire-extinguishing  systems  on  all 
ships in order to demonstrate that the system is kept in 
good working order as specified in SOLAS regulation II-
2/14.2.1.2.  In addition to other important information, it 
provides useful maintenance and inspection guidance.   
 
One related monthly inspection item suggests checking 
that  all  “high  pressure  cylinders  are  in  place  and 
properly secured.” 

D 

 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that vessel owners and operators obtain MSC.1/Cir.1318 
for  distribution  to  their  fleets.    In  addition,  each  vessel’s  Safety  Management  System  should 
incorporate  the  Circular’s  pertinent  data.    Public  users  can  establish  a  free  account  to  access  the 
Circular  and  other  important  information  at  https://docs.imo.org/.    The  Coast  Guard  also  urges 
owners and operators to ensure the following steps are taken for each fixed CO2 system: 
 

•  Bottle installation must be accomplished carefully considering hose and actuator positioning in 
addition to  ensuring stress is minimized for  each hose.  Securing  devices must be inspected 
for effectiveness.  

•  Vessel crewmembers should check for bottle rotation, loose bottles, and excessive stress on 
discharge  hoses  during  periodic  inspections  of  fixed  CO2  systems.    All  appropriate  safety 
precautions  should  be  completed  prior  to  taking  any  actions  to  re-secure  or  reposition  CO2 
cylinders.   

 
This  information  has  been  provided  by  the  Marine  Inspectors  at  USCG  Marine  Safety  Detachment, 
Lake Worth.   This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any 
domestic  or  international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  with  assistance  of 
the  Marine  Safety  Detachment,  Lake  Worth  and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty  Analysis,  Washington  DC.    Questions  may  be  sent  to  HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil.  
                                                                           
                                                                          ******* 

 
 

Page | 2 

