 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 8, 2018  
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Safety Alert 09-18 

It’s just a Slide. What could go wrong? 

Get seriously injured and you’ll sing a different song! 

vessels 

Hazard Area 

commercial 

 
This safety alert stems from two separate casualties 
investigated  by  Coast  Guard  Marine  Safety  Unit 
Chicago.  At issue is the installation of water slides 
onboard 
sometimes 
characterized  as  “Party  Boats.”    In  both  events, 
passengers  using  the  slide  contacted  the  vessel’s 
aft rail and sustained severe bone fractures.  
 
Slides  much  like  those  commonly  used  at  pools, 
shown  in  Photograph  1,  offer  an  element  of  fun 
during hot days on the water.  Besides commercial 
vessels  they  are  also  found  installed  onboard 
private boats, rental house boats, and rental party 
barges.    The  Coast  Guard  does  not  regulate  the 
installation or usage of these slides.   
 
The  slide  in  Photograph  1  above  is  of  the  open  flume  design.    Closed  flume  slides  (e.g.,  tubular 
designs) help to prevent users from contacting components external to the slide.  
 
With  the  open  flume  slide,  users  should  keep  arms 
and legs away from objects they might encounter on 
the  way  down.    However,  that  common  sense 
approach isn’t always observed.  Slide users who are 
enjoying a party atmosphere and alcoholic beverages 
have  strayed  off  the  preferred path  during  the  short 
descent before hitting the water.  As can be seen in 
the Photograph 1 above, contacting the rail on which 
the slide sits on would not be difficult to do. 
 
To reduce the contact hazard to slide users, supports 
can be installed directly under the slide as show in the 
Photograph 2. 
 
 
 
 
 

Photograph 1 

Photograph 2 

 

Page | 1 

Safety Alert 09-18 

 
 
It is understood that there may be many human factors 
such as misjudgment, impairment, and carelessness 
that can lead to slide injuries.  Photograph 3 shows a 
passenger  who  went  down  an 
independently 
supported  slide  that  was  clear  of  any  objects  at  the 
base  that  could  be  struck  and  cause  injury.    In  this 
instance  the  person’s  path  down  the  slide  was 
irregular  because  he  attempted  to  go  down  it  while 
standing up.   
 
The  Coast  Guard  emphatically  reminds  Owners, 
Operators  and  Captains  of  any  vessel  with  a  slide 
installed that they have the responsibility to ensure the 
overall  safety  of  their  vessels,  passengers,  and 
crewmembers.    If  a  slide  installation  appears  to 
present unnecessary risk, actions should be taken to minimize the dangers to those persons 
who may use it. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  USCG  Marine  Safety  Unit 
Chicago and distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis. Questions may be sent to HQS-
PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:  There are ASTM standards that relate to slide design, construction, and operations of shore side 
installations.  These standards may provide some important insights to those persons or organizations 
installing  slides  on  vessels.    ASTM  reference  numbers:    ASTM  F2376 Water Slide Systems;  ASTM 
F2291 Standard Practice for Design of Amusement Rides and Devices 

Photograph 3 

 

Page | 2 

