         

 
 
December 14, 2011 
Washington, DC 
 

 

 

 

   Alert 07-11 

Listen & Live / Develop & Follow Smart Safety Procedures 

 
This  alert  reminds  all  maritime  personnel  of  the  dangers  associated  with  working  around  or  near 
moving machinery.   
 
A recent marine casualty resulted in a death onboard a Great Lakes ore carrier. Two crewmembers 
had  been  working  on  clearing  the  vessel’s  sump  pump  bilge  piping  within  a  cargo  conveyor  belt 
tunnel.    The  piping  ran  vertically  along  the  bulkhead  adjacent  to  the  conveyor  belt.    Because  the 
clearance between the belt and piping was small, the crew had to step on a large pulley that was part 
of  the  system.    Simultaneously,  a  shore-side  contractor  was  working  on  the  conveyor  system  in 
another part of the vessel and well removed from the crew working on the bilge piping.  
 
Prior to undertaking the work, the person in charge and all involved working on or near the conveyor 
had taken some precautions to establish a sequence of audio alarms to use as an alert. It consisted 
of  an  initial  alarm  sounding  the  need  to  clear  the  belt,  followed  by  another  alarm  notification  five 
minutes later and just prior to starting of the conveyor. 
 
While the crewmembers were working on the piping the initial alarm sounded and they removed their 
tools and got off of the belt.  Shortly thereafter, one person went back on the belt to resume work.  His 
co-worker emphatically told him to get off the belt several times but the he refused, stating that the 
audible  tunnel  alarm  was  not  the  conveyor    belt  alarm  but  rather  a  watertight  door  alarm  which 
created  a  similar  sound.    The  alarm  sounded  again,  the  belt  started,  and  the  crewmember  was 
entangled in the conveyor system and killed. 
 
In a very recent casualty another man was killed by entanglement with a conveyor system.  Although 
this investigation is in its early stage it appears his arm was caught and severed within components of 
the  conveyor.    It  is  reported  that  no  safety  procedures  existed  pertaining  to  work  on  or  around  the 
conveyor system and that the deceased did not have a radio or other device to call for help. 
 
Although  the  investigations  are  not  yet  complete  and  other  causal  factors  may  be  discovered  the 
Coast Guard strongly recommends that Owners/Operators, Classification Society Surveyors, vessel 
managers and those involved with the inspection of vessels to ensure that:  
 

• 

regardless  of  how  “its  been  done  before,”  develop  and  implement  operational,    maintenance 
and  repair  procedures,  including  a  focus  on  safety  precautions  for  any  element  of  vessel 
operations that presents a risk of injury or death; 

•  every crewmember working in remote spaces be provided with radio or similar communication 

devices to ensure instant communication with others onboard; 

•  effective  lock  out  and  tag  out  systems  are  utilized  and  involve  all  persons  working  on  a 

particular system as responsible parties for the process and clearing;  

•  verbal  acknowledgements  from  involved  personnel  of    “All  Clear”  are  required  prior  to  the 

remote starting of any system when work is taking place on or near the system;   

 

•  work actually upon or near live machinery is prohibited  while other work is being performed on 

the same machinery; and  
 

For crewmembers, the Coast Guard strongly recommends: 
 

• 

•  Review frequently and ensure that safe work practices and procedures are always followed. 

 
If  safe  work  procedures  and  safe  working  practices  are  not  available  request  that  they  be 
developed.  Study  them,  raise  questions,  don’t  embrace  methods  or  procedures  that  present 
risk, even if it has always been done like that before. 
 

•  Listen to your shipmates when warnings of potential dangers are given. 

 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes and does not relieve any foreign or domestic 
requirement.  Developed and distributed by the USCG Office of Investigations and Analysis, 
Washington, DC.   Questions may be addressed to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil.    
 

****** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

 

