 
 
 
 
 
 
October 29, 2010 
Washington, DC  

 

 

 

 

 

 

                              Advisory 01-10 

DISTRACTED OPERATIONS 

 Don’t let it be you!  

 
Throughout  the  United  States,  and  across  all  transportation  modes,  safety  initiatives  are  being 
established  to  address  issues  related  to  Distracted  Operations.    The  Coast  Guard  recognizes  the 
importance  of  this  issue,  understands  the  potential  consequences  caused  by  increased  operational 
risk  in  marine  operations,  and  is  supportive  of  the  goals  and  objectives  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Transportation and other distracted driving safety initiatives. 
 
With  respect  to  vessel  operations,  the  bridge  team  management  approach  to  safe  navigation  is  an 
essential  element  of  risk  management  and  safe  vessel  operations.    The  team  approach  to  safe 
navigation  requires  the  clear,  frequent  and  accurate  exchange  of  information  between  all 
crewmembers  relative  to  the  safe  operation  of  the  vessel.    In  other  evolutions,  such  as  discharging 
cargo,  loading  fuels,  etc.,  full  attention  is  required  by  all  involved  in  order  to  prevent  casualties  or 
pollution incidents.  Additionally, when mariners are navigating or working alone, the use of cellular or 
other  devices  unrelated  to  the  operation  at  hand  could  impede  the  exchange  of  vital  operational 
information,  delay  reaction  time,  or  cause  attention  lapses  of  those  involved  which  could    result  in 
unwanted  circumstances  having  very  serious  consequences  causing  injuries  and  fatalities,  material 
damage, and environmental impact. 
 
NTSB  findings  in  investigations  involving  other  transportation  modes  have  found  that  the  use  of 
cellular telephones and other wireless devices can degrade performance, slow response times, and 
increase  attention  lapses  of  those  in  safety-sensitive  positions.  A  recent  executive  order  signed  by 
President Obama prohibits text messaging by federal employees, including contractors, when driving 
government vehicles or their privately owned vehicles on government business. Most states and the 
District  of  Columbia  (DOC)  have  recognized  the  risk  and  banned  texting  while  driving.  Nine  states 
and the DOC have banned the use of handheld cellular telephones while driving.  Lastly, the United 
States  Department  of  Transportation  has  established  a  national  initiative  focusing  on  Driving 
Distracted.  (More information is available at http://distraction.gov.) 
 
The potential risk associated with improper use of cellular telephones and other devices in the marine 
environment  while  navigating  or  performing  other  vessel  functions  should  be  apparent  to  vessel 
owners and operators.   
 
Consequently, the Coast Guard strongly recommends vessel owners and operators to develop and 
implement  effective  operational  policies  outlining  when  the  use  of  cellular  telephones  and  other 
devices is appropriate or prohibited. 
 
This advisory is for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Headquarters Office of Investigations 
and Analysis.   Questions may be forwarded to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil. 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

