         

 
 
April 8, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

   Alert 03-14 

 

FAILURE OF HAND PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHER 

 
This Safety Alert serves as a reminder to vessel owners/operators and fire safety equipment servicing 
companies  to  use  caution  when  replacing  components  on  hand  portable  fire  extinguishers.    While 
examining the activities surrounding a fire onboard a vessel, Coast Guard investigators from Sector 
Hampton  Roads  learned  of  the  failure  of  a  hand  portable  15  pound  (lb)  Carbon  Dioxide  (CO2) 
extinguisher.  During a fire-fighting event, a crewmember attempted to use a 15 lb CO2 extinguisher, 
but the extinguisher failed to properly discharge and only seeped from the neck of the extinguisher.  
The fire was extinguished by another crewmember using a dry-chemical fire extinguisher. 
 
The  investigators  had  the  extinguisher  examined  at  a  fire-fighting  equipment  service  center.    They 
determined  that  the  hose  and  discharge  horn  had  been  replaced  at  an  earlier  time.  The  end  of  the 
hose screws on to a diffuser on the side of the discharge valve/handle assembly of the extinguisher.  
The  diffuser  is  a  ported  protrusion  on  the  male  end  of  a  ninety  degree  fitting.    On  the  side  of  the 
protrusion are orifices through which the CO2 flows.  The examination revealed that the spherical end 
of the protrusion, which contains no orifices, bottomed out against the orifice in the connection fitting 
that leads to the hose and horn assembly.  The flow of CO2 was thus completely blocked.   
 
It was further noted that the male threads of the diffuser were tapered US national pipe threads, while 
the  female  threads  of  the  hose  connection  were  straight.    This  difference  likely  allowed  the  hose 
connection to be tightened further than intended on the diffuser threads, permitting the spherical end 
of  the  diffuser  to  bottom  out  against  the  orifice  in  the  tube.    This  may  have  also  resulted  in  the 
reported leakage from the neck of the extinguisher due to back pressure. 
 

 

 
Newer types of diffusers exist in which the orifice follows the length of the protrusion and the end is 
not  spherical.    However,  the  issues  regarding  the  tightening  of  the  two  components  and  the 
importance  of  ensuring  proper  lengths  and  compatibility  of  the  threaded  and  machined  surfaces 
remain.    Binding  or  bottoming  out  should  not  occur  except  at  the  threaded  surfaces.    Replacement 
parts should be as specified by the original manufacturer of the extinguisher. 
 

 

1

The Coast Guard does not know the extent of this problem or if this particular instance of failure is an 
outlier.  It involved an older CO2 extinguisher with a hose and horn assembly that had been replaced.  
We  do  not  advise  owners/operators  or  vessel  personnel  to  take  apart  or  disassemble  their 
extinguishers.    Only  technicians  from  fire  equipment  service  companies  should  work  on  this 
equipment.    
 
The  Coast  Guard  only  advises  that  if  owners/operators,  based  on  visual  examination  of  their 
equipment, believe there is a possibility of potential blockage of flow due to conditions as described 
above,  they  should  contact  a  qualified  fire  equipment  service  company  for  more  thorough 
examination, testing, and repair, if needed. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  recommends  that  fire  equipment  service  companies  be  aware  of  the  potential 
problems described above, and ensure that all replacement components for servicing hand portable 
fire extinguishers are as specified by the original extinguisher manufacturer.  Service companies that 
market  replacement  parts  should  also  note  the  importance  of  these  concerns  and  advise  their 
customers  accordingly.    If  the  appropriate  replacement  parts  are  not  available,  the  extinguisher 
should be replaced. 
 
Owners/operators and fire equipment service companies are requested to contact the Coast Guard at 
typeapproval@uscg.mil if this issue is discovered to be a widespread problem.  Special appreciation 
to Sector Hampton Roads investigation shop for identifying this important issue. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  Sector  Hampton  Roads 
Investigations  and  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  Washington,  DC.    For  questions  or 
concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

 

2

