 
 
 
 
 
April 27, 2010                                                                                                                Alert 03-10 
Washington, DC                                 

 

Portable Generator use on 
Recreational Houseboats 

 
Three persons recently died aboard a houseboat due to the use of a portable generator.  They were 
overcome by carbon monoxide from a generator that was being operated in the engine compartment 
adjacent to the main cabin. 
 
The  nonoperational  1973  Gibson  houseboat  was  anchored  at  the  time  of  the  casualty;  a  portable 
generator  was  being  used  to  provide  power  for  lights,  as  well  as,  charging  batteries  for  the  boat’s 
bilge  pumps.    The  generator  was  partially  lowered  into  the  houseboat’s  engine  compartment 
alongside  the  remnants  of  the  houseboat’s  inoperable  main  propulsion  engine.    Investigators 
concluded that the 3500 watt generator’s exhaust permeated the houseboat’s firewall (immediately aft 
of  cabin)  and  bilge  filling  the  cabin  with  carbon  monoxide.    The  duration  of  exposure  is  unknown; 
however, autopsy reports of the deceased indicated that their carboxyhemoglobin (COhb) saturation 
levels were in excess of 60%. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  encourages  boaters  to  ensure  proper  ventilation  to  prevent  the 
accumulation of combustion gases from any equipment.  Generators, main engines, powered pumps, 
kerosene  space  heaters,  barbeque  grills,  etc..,  will  create  hazardous  atmospheres  if  improperly 
maintained  and  if  there  is  inadequate  ventilation  or  if  gasses  can  accumulate.  Placement  of  such 
equipment  on  an  open  deck  may  not  be  adequate  if  the  exhaust  enters  the  vessel’s  cabin  through 
other  intakes.      Accumulation  of  carbon  monoxide  can  occur  even  outside  of  a  boat  in  those  areas 
between catamaran hulls or between boats tied together. Prolonged exposure regardless of location 
can be deadly.   
 
To prevent accidental deaths as described in this casualty, the Coast Guard urges the use of carbon 
monoxide detectors for internal enclosed areas of boats, particularly sleeping quarters.   
 
Access  http://www.uscgboating.org/safety/carbon_monoxide.aspx  for  additional  carbon  monoxide 
prevention and other useful boating safety information. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Boating Safety Division’s 
Product Assurance Branch and distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis, United States 
Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC.    Questions  can  be  addressed  to  Mr.    Michael 
Jendrossek at (202) 372-1052 or michael.a.jendrossek@uscg.mil 

 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

 

******* 

