 
 
 

 

                                            Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

May 30, 2018 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Safety Alert 06-18 

Don’t Let Your Vessel Get Underway Unexpectedly! 

Bollard Failures at Marine Facilities 

 

Recently, there have been a number of shore side marine 
bollard failures whereby moored vessels were cast adrift.  In 
some cases this resulted in damage to the involved vessel 
as well as other nearby vessels and shore side structures.  
Thankfully, there were no related injuries or deaths.  Neither 
the  Coast  Guard  nor  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health 
Administration (OSHA) has regulatory oversight over these 
items. 
 
In several cases the underlying deficient material condition 
of  the  bollards  was  unknown  until  the  failures  occurred. 
Causes  include  the  rotting  of  organic  bollards  made  of 
marine  pilings,  the  undetected  fracture  of  bollard  castings 
due  to  manufacturer  defects,  damage  from  previous 
overloads,  or  the  degradation  of  bollard  foundations  and 
fasteners.    Typically,  the  failures  are  associated  with 
abnormal  dynamic  loads  transferred  to  the  bollard  from  a 
vessel.  
 
The  abnormal  loads  are  oftentimes  caused  by  excessive 
winds acting against the sail area of vessels which can be 
substantial  for  certain  types  of  vessels  such  as  container 
and cruise ships.  Forces developed by winds acting against 
a  vessel’s  hull  rise  exponentially  as  the  wind  speed 
increases and, as a result, are often extreme.  Also, vessel 
operators often encounter facilities that have an insufficient 
number  of  bollards  or  not  enough  bollards  in  the  correct 
locations  to  ensure  good  marine  mooring  practices  are 
followed.    Finally,  circumstances  associated  with  bollard 
failures  may  relate  to  the  hydrodynamics  of  narrow 
waterways,  specifically  when  a  large  vessel  approaches 
and passes a moored vessel.  
 
The  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  NAVAL  Facilities 
Engineering  Command  and  Air  Force  Civil  Engineering 
Support Agency have developed a helpful document on this 
topic titled Unified Facilities Criteria “Inspection of Mooring 
Hardware” UFC 4-150-08i.   
 

Rotted Piling 

Indications of Possible Pre-existing Fracture 

Failure of Base Casting 

Page | 1 

Safety Alert 06-18 

 
 
This  handbook  provides  naval  facilities  guidance  for  the  planning,  inspection,  assessment,  and 
reporting of mooring hardware conditions.  
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  facility 
owners  and  operators  take  steps  to  develop  a  routine 
inspection  program 
for  bollards  and  other  mooring 
equipment.    Furthermore,  vessel  personnel  should  report 
discoveries  of  apparently  deficient  shore  side  mooring 
equipment to facility managers.  
 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only 
and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international  safety, 
operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the, 
Sector  Boston  Investigations  Division.    Distributed  by  the 
Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis.  Questions  may  be 
sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
                                                            
i https://www. wbdg.org/ffc/dod/unified-facilities-criteria-ufc/ufc-4-150-08 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Deteriorated Base of Bollard 

 

 

Page | 2 

