 

March 3, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 2-15 
 

 

Ultra Low Sulfur Fuel Oil & Compliance with MARPOL Requirements 

Before entering and while operating within Emission Control Areas 

This safety alert is a reminder to vessel owners and operators about the importance of establishing 
effective fuel oil changeover procedures to comply with MARPOL Annex VI emission regulations.  
Recently,  there  have  been  several  reported  incidents  involving  substantial  machinery  space  fuel 
leakages  while  vessels  were  switching  fuel  oil  to  ensure  compliance.    Although  such  leakages 
were contained, fuel releases of any kind may result in pollution, injury or death of personnel and 
shipboard engine room fires.  Moreover, many losses of propulsion have occurred in different ports 
and have been associated with changeover processes and procedures. 
 
On  January  1,  2015,  the  new  fuel  oil  sulfur  limit  authorized  by  MARPOL  Annex  VI,  Regulation 
14.3.4  came  into  effect,  lowering  fuel  sulfur  content  from  1.0%  to  0.10%.1  The  0.10%  fuel  sulfur 
content  must  be  used  the  entire  time  the  vessel  is  operating  in  the  North  American  and  U.S. 
Caribbean  Sea  Emission  Control  Areas  (ECA).    As  a  result,  vessels  using  higher  sulfur  content 
fuels must change to ultra low sulfur (ULS) fuel oil to comply.  The vessels must use the ULS fuel 
oil  on  inbound  and  outbound  transits,  at  the  dock,  and  anytime  within  the  ECA.    Meeting  this 
requirement requires planning and analysis before any changeover from higher sulfur content fuel 
oil to ECA compliant fuel oil and vice-versa.   Each ship which uses higher sulfur content fuel oil is 
required  to  develop  and  implement  changeover  procedures  for  switching  between  residual  and 
distillate fuels in accordance with MARPOL Annex VI, Regulation 14.6. 
 
In  some  cases  vessels  may  require  fuel  oil  service  or  day  tank  modifications  and  fuel  oil  service 
piping  modifications  to  facilitate  safe  procedures  and  compliant  fuel  operations  within  the  ECAs.  
The  management  and  oversight  of  any  fuel  oil  mixing  that  may  be  part  of  a  changeover  process 
including, proper control and reduction of the operating temperature of fuel supplied, varying ratios 
of  the  mixed  fuels  and  control  of  mixed  fuel  viscosity  to  the  engines  must  take  place  before  the 
vessel enters the ECAs or after the vessel leaves the ECAs.  The amounts of ULS fuel oil onboard 
must be enough to satisfy the vessel’s fuel demand at all times while the vessel operates within the 
ECAs or efforts should be made to take on additional ULSF while in port.   
 
There are many other important technical issues associated with the use of ultra low sulfur fuel oils 
and  fuel  oil  switching  addressed  in  documents  produced  by  class  societies,  insurers,  engine 
manufacturers and industry associations. A few of these documents are presented as links at the 
bottom of the next page.    
            

 
                                                
1 Vessels that have an accepted exemption under Marpol Annex VI, Regulation 3 or an equivalency under Regulation 4 may not 
need to switch fuel depending on the requirements of their exemption or equivalency. 

 

 

1 

Safety Alert 2-15 

 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that vessel owners and operators: 
 

•  Ensure  fuel  oil  switching  is  accomplished  outside  of  busy  traffic  lanes  and  the  ECA. 
Generally  the  ECA  is  200  nm  from  the  North  American  Coast  and  50  miles  from  the  U.S. 
Caribbean coast (e.g., the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands); 

•  Utilize their technical resources to develop safe operations and maintain full compliance with 

emission requirements; 

•  Consult  with  engine  and  boiler  manufacturers  for  fuel  oil  changeover  guidance  and  to 

determine if system modifications or additional safeguards are necessary; 

•  Consult fuel suppliers for proper fuel selection; 
•  Ensure  all  sensors,  controls  and  alarms  –  pressure,  temperature,  viscosity,  differential 

pressure, flow indicators, etc.,  are  operational and function as designed; 

•  Ensure system piping, seals, gaskets, flanges, fittings, brackets, etc., are maintained. 
•  Ensure detailed system schematics are available;  
•  Review and update fuel oil changeover procedures as needed; 
•  Establish a fuel oil system inspection and maintenance schedule; 
•  Review and update fuel changeover procedures based on lessons learned; 
•  Provide initial and periodic crew training for accomplishing safe, effective and leak-free fuel 

switching; 

•  Remember that the energy content of a given volume of ULS fuel oil may differ from residual 
fuel,  such  that  existing  throttle  settings  may  not  give  the  desired  propeller  shaft  RPM  or 
generator  loads  and  performance/speed  trials  on  ULS  fuel  oil  may  need  to  be  conducted 
and; 

•  Anticipate that there may be many technical challenges for operators when beginning to use 
ULS fuel oil as a matter of routine and compliance.  These range from excessive leakages 
of fuel system components, increased wear and tear on these components, lack of lubricity 
of  the  fuels  and  the  need  for  possible  changes  in  maintenance  schedules,  operational 
methods, etc.  The links below provide additional information on these topics. 

  

This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Questions  regarding  this  should  be 
forwarded  to  the  Coast  Guard  Office  of  Commercial  Vessel  Compliance,  Foreign  and  Offshore 
Vessel Division (CG-CVC-2) at 202-372-1218 or by email at CGCVC@uscg.mil.   

Note: The Coast Guard has collected the following links from open internet sources and re-
posted them for informational purposes only. Their inclusion here is not an endorsement or 
expression of preference of any kind towards any specific publication or organization. 

•  MAN B&W Operation on Low Sulphur Fuels 
•  Wartsila Low Sulphur Fuel Guidelines 
•  Steamship Mutual – Risk Alert: ECAs Low Sulphur Fuel Oil Changeover Procedures 
• 

International Council on Combustion Engines  -  Guidelines for the Operation of 
Marine Engines  on Low Sulphur Fuel 

•  ABS Fuel Switching Advisory Notice 
•  DNVGL – Sulphur Limits 2015 Guidelines on Compliance 
• 

Intertanko/OCIMF Recommendations on the Hazard Assessment of Fuel Changeover 
Processes 

 

******* 

2 

 

