 

 

 

 

 
March 14, 2019  
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Safety Alert 02-19 

 

Not all navigation lights are created equal. 

Navigation  lights  intended  for  use  on  power  driven  vessels  may  be  different  from  navigation  lights 
intended for use on sailing vessels. Although the horizontal arc of visibility is the same for all lights, the 
vertical divergence (i.e. vertical arc of visibility) requirements for lights on vessels under sail are larger 
to  accommodate  greater  heeling.   Manufacturer  labeling may not  discriminate  between  the  different 
requirements.  Navigation lights that claim compliance with the navigation rules1 may meet the vertical 
visibility requirements for a power driven vessel, however, they may not comply with the vertical visibility 
standards for sailing vessels.  Manufacturer labeling may not indicate that the lights are designed for 
use on power-driven vessels only. 
 
Annex  I  (COLREGs  section  10  and  Inland  33  C.F.R.  part  84.16  “Vertical  sectors”)  prescribes  the 
degrees and intensities that navigation lights must meet on the vertical plane.  Many boat owners may 
not be aware of the +/- 25° vertical light divergence requirement for sailing vessels, a 17.5° increase 
from the power-driven vessel standard.  Installing a navigation light, designed for use on a power driven 
vessel,  on  a  sailing  vessel  may  result  in  the  light  losing  visibility  when  the  vessel  heels beyond  the 
narrower  +/-  7.5°  vertical  divergence  angle  established  for  power-driven  vessels.  A  sailing  vessel 
operator in this situation would likely not realize that the sailing vessel’s lights were not visible when 
heeling beyond 7.5°. 
 

What does this mean?  
If  your  sailboat  does  not  have  the  correct  lights  (sidelights,  masthead  lights,  all-round  lights,  and/or 
combined  lantern)  and  it  heels  past  a  certain  degree,  it  may  not  be  observable  by  other  vessel 
operators. 
                                                           
1 The International Maritime Organization Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972 
(COLREG 72) and 33 Code of Federal Regulations part 83 through 88. 

 

 

 
Why is that important? 
You may not know that other vessels cannot see you due to the heel of your vessel.  Failure to operate 
with the correct navigation lights may create a situation where you mistakenly believe another mariner 
is able to ascertain your vessel’s aspect or operational condition, which increases risk of collision. 
 

 

 

 
Although a navigation light designed for a sailing vessel will not meet the vertical visibility requirements 
for  a  power  driven  vessel,  it  does  not  pose  a  commensurate  safety  concern  (see  diagram  above).  
Manufacturers should be aware of the larger vertical visibility requirement for lights installed on sailing 
vessels.  Likewise, sailing vessel operators and vessel repair facilities should ensure the installed lights 
meet  the  applicable  requirements  in Annex  I.    Since  not  all  navigation  lights  are  designed  similarly, 
ensure that when you install a navigation light it is USCG certified for the length and type of boat.  Such 
information should be readily available from reputable sources such as the light or vessel manufacturer. 
 

This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational, or material requirement. Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Navigation Systems. Questions may be sent to cgnav@uscg.mil. 

 

