 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 8, 2018  
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Safety Alert 08-18 

Overeating Can Create Dangerous Gas! 

(Especially with Anaerobic Bacteria) 

This safety alert shares important information related to a unique, not very well known and potentially 
deadly  hazard  that  recently  developed  on  a  vessel  involving  the  formation  of  dangerous  levels  of 
Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S)1 gas within a waste oil tank.  This was determined to be due to the use of 
biodegradable cleaners and the chemical reactions and resultant H2S byproduct involved in breaking 
down oils in an anaerobic (low oxygen) environment like that found in a full slop tank. In this case, 
vessel officers had detected significant H2S concentrations (>200 PPM) in the vessel’s engine room 
bilge holding tank.  This circumstance had existed for quite some time as crewmembers had previously 
reported smelling the distinctive odor of rotten eggs in the vicinity of the slop tank, which is an indicator 
of the gas.   
 
Two  hundred  (200)  PPM  of  H2S  is  considered  Immediately  Dangerous  to  Life  and  Health  (IDLH).  
Furthermore, the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) was found to be in the dangerous flammable range, at 
100%  LEL,  in  the  same  tank.    Vessel  crew  responded  to  the  immediate  hazardous  condition  by 
continually monitoring the tank atmosphere, inerting the tank and ultimately discharging its contents 
onto a slop barge for processing.  During the company’s subsequent investigation and research they 
discovered  other  instances  involving  the  same  type  of  problem  which  had  pointed  to  the  use  of 
biodegradable cleaners as the primary cause for high levels of H2S gas.  
 
Another similar case involved dangerous levels of H2S gas concentrations found on several tug boats.  
Initially, H2S gas was discovered when personnel began to transfer waste ashore from a pressed up 
and nearly full slop tank containing typical oily bilge slops.  A marine chemist investigated the issue 
and examined a total of three similar towing vessels for comparison.  Two of the three tugs examined 
had dangerously high levels of H2S gas attributable to the use of a biodegradable soy based cleaner.  
The third tug did not use a biodegradable product.  In these instances the cleaner provided micro-
nutrients  to  the  waste  water  thus  causing  the  bacteria  to  thrive  resulting  in  increased  rates  of  H2S 
production. 
 
As  a  result  of  a  tragic  accident  where  three  sailors  were  asphyxiated  when  a  bilge  waste  tank 
containing  about  82  tons  of  waste  spilled  into  an  inhabited  space  releasing  H2S  gas,  the  Royal  
Australian  Navy  sponsored  scientific  research  and  issued  a  series  of  four  reports  related  to  H2S 
development in oily waste and ballast tanks.  The final report of the research into the H2S issue was 
titled “Hydrogen Sulfide Generation in Shipboard Oily-Water Waste, Part 4, Minimization of the 
Problem”2 and it states the following: 
 

                                                           
1 https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/hydrogensulfide/hazards.html 
2 http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=ADA301431 
 

 
 
 

Page | 1 

 
 

 

Safety Alert 08-18 

 
 
“The  hydrogen  sulfide  problem  has  resulted  from  efforts  to  protect  the  marine  environment  from 
pollution.  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  single  straightforward  solution  to  the  problem  as  the  primary 
ingredients - sea-water and biodegradable detergents - are an essential part of a ship's operation. The 
solution would appear to lie in attention to oily-water waste management procedures and machinery 
space housekeeping practices. Elimination or minimization of the hydrogen sulfide problem will come 
from ensuring that the contents of the oily-water waste holding tank do not provide an optimal growth 
medium for sulfate reducing bacteria. The following recommendations can be made:  
 

1.  Review machinery space cleaning practices; clean machinery spaces with detergents when the 
ship is in port, preferably using fresh water; do not add the washings to the oily-water holding 
tank but, instead, pump them directly to a shore-based disposal facility; if possible, avoid the 
use  of  biodegradable  detergents  at  sea  to  prevent  their  addition  to  the  holding  tank.  
 

2.  Review drainage pathways of all nutrient-bearing "non-oily" wastes (washdown water from 

galleys, heads, etc.) and ensure they do not enter the oily-water waste system.  
 

3.  Keep the sea-water content of the oily-water waste as low as possible; always use fresh water 
for  cleaning  operations  when  it  is  available;  handle  "emulsified"  oily-water  waste  apart  from 
"non-emulsified"  oily-water  waste  so  that  separation  equipment  can  be  used  effectively.  
 

4.  Be aware of the chemical composition of cleaning agents and other substances entering bilge; 
use  biodegradable  detergents  sparingly;  avoid  the  addition  of  phosphates  to  the  oily-water 
waste; DSTO (Commonwealth of Australia, Dept. of Defense, Defense Science and Technology 
Organization)  advice  should  be  sought  before  introduction  of  new  cleaning  agents.  
 

5.  Prevent the oily-water waste from becoming anaerobic; remove bilge from machinery spaces 

frequently; keep the contents of the holding tank well aerated.  
 

6.  Finally, do not store oily-water waste on a ship unnecessarily, dispose of it at every available 

opportunity.” 

 

The Coast Guard strongly recommends that Owners and Operators, vessel crewmembers, Port and 
Flag State examination personnel and other persons associated with the operation of vessels of any 
size  evaluate  the  information  presented  in  this  alert  and  where  appropriate  incorporate  it  into 
onboard operations, training, awareness and H2S exposure prevention efforts. 
 
Special thanks to the U.S. Operator for sharing their experience with this issue. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations and Analysis.  Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

Page | 2 

