 
 
 
 
November 30, 2009                                                                                                                Alert 08-09 
Washington, DC 

UNAPPROVED EPIRB BATTERY REPLACEMENTS 

 

Fishing vessel safety staff in the Coast Guard’s Seventh District has received at least three reports in 
the  past  few  months  regarding  unapproved  replacements  of  406  EPIRB  batteries  by  servicing 
companies  having  no  association  with  the  EPIRB  manufacturer.    These  unauthorized  battery 
installations would likely result in a failure of this critical item of lifesaving equipment, and as such are 
not in compliance with the operational readiness requirements of 46 CFR. 
 
The following is a typical excerpt from an EPIRB manufacturer report: 
 

“The unit was opened and a foreign battery was found inside.  The battery was built up using 
(manufacturer) fuses and wiring salvaged from the original (manufacturer) battery.  They then 
covered their battery with the original (manufacturer) yellow heat shrink, (manufacturer) labels 
and taped it together.  This was then covered with a black heat shrink wrap.  The connections 
were  soldered  and  not  spot  welded,  as  is  required  by  the  design  and  is  performed  in 
(manufacturer) production.  The battery measured 8.7 volts.  Our batteries read 9+ volts when 
they are new.  This battery was installed one week prior to it being brought into (manufacturer). 
 
There  was  also  evidence  of  water  intrusion  due  to  the  crack  in  the  top  cap,  which  (servicing 
company) did not recognize as they are not trained in these matters. 
 
The EPIRB was condemned by (manufacturer) and the customer was notified when he came 
to pick the unit up.”  

 
Every  approved  (i.e.,  accepted  by  the  FCC)  EPIRB  is  tested  during  its  approval  process  using  a 
battery,  or  batteries,  specified  by  the  manufacturer.    Approved  EPIRBs  come  with  a  user's  manual 
which describes battery maintenance and replacement procedures.  In order for the EPIRB to remain 
within  the  conditions  of  its  approval,  the  manufacturer's  instructions  in  the  user's  manual  must  be 
adhered  to.    To  ensure  that  replacement  batteries  are  of  the  same  type  with  which  the  EPIRB  was 
approved, and are correctly installed, manufacturers typically specify that battery replacements only 
be done by the manufacturer or a manufacturer-approved shop. 
 
Any modification or changes to an EPIRP must be made in accordance with the manufacturer.  The 
use  of  alternative  replacement  parts  or  batteries  is  prohibited  and  may  prevent  the  device  from 
meeting lifesaving requirements.  The Coast Guard strongly reminds EPIRB owners and servicing 
facilities to be aware of the compliance implications and potential for equipment failure stemming from 
any EPIRB modification or unauthorized battery replacement. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Questions  regarding  the  information 
presented  in  this  alert  may  be  addressed  to  LCDR  Vince  Gamma  of  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard 
Headquarters 
or 
Vincent.A.Gamma@uscg.mil. 
                                                                                  ******** 

Lifesaving  &  Fire  Safety  Standards  Division 

202.372.1396 

at 

 

