  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 12, 2003 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

LIFE JACKET STORAGE AND ACCESSIBILITY 

      Safety Alert 09-03 
 

A  few  years  ago  a  small  passenger  vessel  approved  to  carry  several  hundred  passengers 
experienced  an  engineroom  fire  during  an  otherwise  routine  voyage.  At  the  time  of  the  casualty, 
there were only three crewmembers and eight adult passengers onboard. Crewmember efforts to 
extinguish the fire were unsuccessful. As a result, the fire and smoke spread quickly. Early during 
the event, the passengers were directed to move to the bow of the vessel. Some time later they 
were provided several life jackets from a storage locker located at the rear of the main cabin. One 
adult  was  given  a  child  size  life  jacket.  Some  passengers  had  difficulty  donning  the  life  jackets. 
Fortunately,  another  vessel  arrived  on  scene  to  aid  the  burning  vessel.  The  passengers  and 
crewmembers  were  able  to  disembark  the  burning  vessel  by  stepping  across  the  bow  on  to  the 
assisting vessel. Damage to the vessel exceeded one million dollars and associated injuries were 
minor.  

As  a  result  of  this  casualty,  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  recommends  that  small  passenger  vessel 
operators  review  the  distribution  of  life  jackets  onboard  their  vessels  to  ensure  compliance  with 
federal life jacket storage requirements.  

Stowage of life jackets  

spaces.  

•  Life  jackets  must  be  stored  in  convenient  places  distributed  throughout  accommodation 

•  Each stowage container for life jackets must not be capable of being locked. If practicable, 

the container must be designed to allow the life jackets to float free.  

•  Each life jacket kept in a stowage container must be readily available.  
•  Each life jacket stowed overhead must be supported in a manner that allows quick release 

• 

for distribution.  
If life jackets are stowed more than 2.13 meters or 7 feet above the deck, a means for quick 
release  must  be  provided  and  must  be  capable  of  operation  by  a  person  standing  on  the 
deck.  

•  Each  child  size  life  jacket  must  be  stowed  in  a  location  that  is  appropriately  marked  and 
separated from adult life jackets so the child size life jackets are not mistaken for adult life 
jackets.  

•  The  stowage  locations  of  the  personal  flotation  devices  carried  in  addition  to  life  jackets 
must be separate from the life jackets, and such as not to be easily confused with that of the 
life jackets. 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

1 

