 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2009                                                                                                                      Alert 01-09 
Washington, DC 

 

Electrical Shock Hazards 

Earlier  this  year  an  engineer  working  onboard  a  chemical  tank  ship  was  electrocuted.  The  incident 
occurred while several engineers were preparing to test a circuit breaker.  The engineer apparently 
made  contact  with  the  unprotected  stripped  ends  of  a  conductor  plugged  into  a  live  480  volt  power 
supply on an electrical test bench. The investigation is currently ongoing and is examining the other 
circumstances surrounding the casualty. However, important safety concerns have been noted.  This 
alert  serves  as  a  reminder  to  the  maritime  industry  about  the  dangers  of  working  with  electrical 
equipment.  
 
With respect to this casualty, the corded three-conductor power supply line being used to connect to 
the  breaker,  also  called  a  pig  tail,  should  not  have  been  energized  until  it  was  connected.    Further, 
depending on the type of equipment  it was being used with, its ends should have had high voltage 
insulated  alligator  clips  or  it  should  have  been  wired  securely  into  the  electrical  component  prior  to 
testing.  Under no circumstances should the ends have been handled with the power turned on. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  all  vessel  owners  and  operators  ensure  that: 
 

1.  Circuits are de-energized prior to performing any work whenever possible. 
2.  Employees having electrical maintenance and repair responsibilities are fully trained regarding 

all safety precautions needed when working with potential electrical hazards. 

3.  Individuals  wear  appropriate  safety  gear  -  insulated  shoes,  dry  clothing,  hard  hat,  rubber 

gloves, and other required protective equipment. 

4.  Appropriate supervision is provided. 
5.  Procedures for the use of test panels and connectors and are found in the Safety Management 

System or other operating manuals and readily available. 

6.  Safe  electrical  equipment  inspection,  maintenance  and  repair  procedures  are  available  and 

followed closely. 

7.  Test equipment is properly maintained according to original plans. 
8.  Tools used in the repair of live equipment are properly insulated. 
9.  Test benches are both properly insulated and grounded in the appropriate areas. 
10. Flooring and other surrounding areas of test benches are properly insulated and dry. 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Investigating  Officers  at 
MSU  Galveston  and  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard 
Headquarters, Washington, DC. 
                                                                        ******* 

 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

