  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 6, 2001 (estimate / reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 
 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 02-01 
 

PASSENGER VESSEL SAFETY ALERT 

From: G-MOC and ICCL 

To: Industry, ICCL members, MSO’s, Area and District M staff 

CRUISE SHIP SUFFERS STEERING PROBLEM WITH RESULTING INJURIES 

Background: The cruise ship NORWEGIAN SKY while approaching the Strait of Juan de Fuca en 
route  to  Victoria,  B.C.  with  2,975  persons,  made  a  sudden  unexpected  hard  turn  to  port.  The 
vessel  was  operating  on  trackpilot  when  it  suddenly  received  a  signal  to  go  to  a  new  heading  of 
270  instead  of  the  intended  track  of  090.  The  NACOS  45-3  Trackpilot  navigation  system  had 
received  an  erroneous  signal  either  due  to  equipment  malfunction,  or  human  error,  or  both.  This 
caused the vessel to take an unexpected and violent turn. The vessel healed to starboard at least 
8  degrees  while  rudder  movements  fluctuated  between  amidships  and  port  45  until  the  swing  of 
the  vessel  was  controlled  using  the  non-follow  up  control  at  the  main  steering  console  on  the 
bridge. 78 persons were injured, most of them resulting from the falling of unsecured objects such 
as arcade games, display cases, and tables. The technician called in to troubleshoot the Trackpilot 
system was unable to replicate the occurrence.  

Lessons  Learned:  While  the  casualty  investigation  for  the  NORWEGIAN  SKY  is  ongoing,  there 
are several initial “Lessons Learned” that can be shared as follows:  

1. Securing for Sea  

Owners  and  operators  of  passenger  vessels  should  review  procedures  and  processes  to  ensure 
that  t  large  items  of  equipment  and  other  heavy  objects  are  adequately  secured  to  prevent 
movement or toppling in the event of sudden or violent ship movements. Of particular concern are 
video  games  and  other  large  items  found  in  children's  recreation  spaces,  casino  equipment, 
display  cases  and  individual  shelving  (especially  glass)  within  retail  stores,  or  any  other  heavy 
objects that could shift or topple during a sudden or violent movement of the ship.  

2. Trackpilot Systems 

Trackpilot  systems  are  complex  navigation  systems  designed  to  be  used  in  confined  waters. 
Training  and  familiarity  with  the  system  are  an  important  component  of  their  safe  use.  Trackpilot 
malfunctions,  in  certain  close  quarter  scenarios  or  heavily  trafficked  waterways,  could  result  in  a 
serious marine casualty such as a grounding or collision. Trackpilots have operational limits such 
as  rudder  limits  that  must  be  established  and  activated  once  the  trackpilot  is  engaged.  For 
example,  proper  rudder  angle  settings  would  limit  the  rudder  to  small  course  change  increments 

1 

even if a large variance in input data is perceived by the sensors. Trackpilot’s should be capable of 
being  disengaged  instantly  in  the  event  of  a  malfunction  or  improper  operation.  Owners  and 
operators  of  passenger  vessels  should  develop  operational  guidance  and  training  programs  to 
assure  proper  and  correct  trackpilot  programming,  crew  familiarity  and  should  develop  and  test 
contingency  plans  to  assure  proper  crew  response  in  the  event  of  a  trackpilot  malfunction  or 
failure.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

