  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 25, 2002 (estimate / reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 
 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 05-02 
 

AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLE OPERATIONS 

Just a few days ago, in the Ottawa River near Gatineau, Canada an amphibious tour vessel sank. 
Two  adults  and  two  children  drowned  as  a  result.  The  facts  and  circumstances  surrounding  the 
event  are  currently  under  investigation  by  the  Transportation  Safety  Board  of  Canada  and  other 
Canadian agencies.  

The United States Coast Guard had no involvement with the inspection or operation of the vehicle. 
Nonetheless, the accident serves as a reminder to amphibious vehicle owners and operators of the 
importance of vehicle operational and post-repair inspections.  

Several recent casualties can be directly attributed to inadequate inspection activities. 

•  May 1999 - The MISS MAJESTIC, a DUKW sank in Lake Hamilton, Arkansas and resulted 
in the loss of thirteen lives. One causal factor of the sinking was the failure of a mechanic to 
inspect the tightness of hose clamps securing the joints on the main drive shaft seals after 
performing maintenance.  

•  September 2000 - The MINNOW, an Alvis Stalwart amphibious vehicle sank in Milwaukee 
Harbor  after  passengers  were  disembarked.  A  failed  bearing  on  the  end  of  a  propulsion 
impeller shaft contributed to the sinking.  

•  December  2001  -  A  "Ride  the  Ducks  of  Seattle,"  DUKW  sank  in  Lake  Union  when  taken 
under  tow  after  disembarking  passengers.  The  vessel  flooded  because  a  mechanic  had 
failed  to  replace  a  4  ½"  drain  plug  which  went  undiscovered  during  a  pre-operational 
inspection.  

The  consequences  of  poorly  performed  operational 
inadequate 
maintenance  and  repair  can  be  serious.  All  persons  involved  with  these  passenger-carrying 
vehicles must recognize the potential for significant casualties resulting directly from their actions 
or inactions. There is no room for complacency. 

inspection  procedures, 

The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and  operators  provide  suitable  time  and 
resources  during  daily  operations  to  perform  vessel  safety  inspections.  Such  inspections  should 
include  evaluations  of  hull  integrity,  flooding  prevention,  assessments  of  emergency  equipment 
and reviews of procedures that may be required during emergencies. Operational and inspection 
processes should be supported by checklists and documented.  

As  a  result  of  the  MISS  MAJESTIC  sinking,  the  Coast  Guard  published  Navigation  and  Vessel 
Inspection  Circular  (NVIC)  No.  1-01.  This  NVIC  contains  additional  technical  information  and 
guidance  related  to  amphibious  passenger  vessel  inspection  and  operation.  We  encourage 

1 

persons involved with amphibious vehicle operations to read this circular. The circular is available 
at http://www.uscg.mil/hq/g-m/nvic/1_01/n1-01.pdf.  

Persons who wish to review the Coast Guard's Marine Board report detailing the circumstances of 
the  MISS  MAJESTIC 
copy  at  http://www.uscg.mil/hq/g-
m/moa/chronocas.htm.  Upon  request,  electronic  versions  of  the  GMC  DUKW-353  technical 
manuals are available for owners and operators.  

casualty  may  obtain  a 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

