 

 
 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 2004 
Washington, DC   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alert 3-04 

Lifeboat Gripes 

The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  has  recently  been  notified  by  a  tank  ship  operator  of  a  problem  discovered 
during lifeboat launching drills. Although this event did not result in injury or death, there have been a 
number  of  lifeboat  launching  casualties  that  have.  Readers  should  note  that  other  manufacturers' 
boats and launching arrangements need to be examined for similar possibilities of entanglement and 
snag hazards. 
 
It  is  reported  that  on  several  occasions  during  lowering  of  a  6.7  meter  totally  enclosed  lifeboat,  the 
ring on the released end of the aft gripe snagged the boat’s “gripe bollard.” The “gripe bollard” may be 
known as a “stern post” or “lashing chock.” 
 
The purpose of the gripes is to secure the lifeboat against the davits when in the stowed position. The 
gripes are essentially straps which attach to the ends of the boat and are secured to the davits. One 
end attaches to a tightening and turnbuckle device, while the other end is attached to a ring that is 
placed over a slip hook. When the lifeboat is brought to its stowed position, the free end of the gripe is 
payed over the gripe bollards on both ends of the vessel and the rings are placed over the slip hooks. 
The slip hooks are then shifted to their closed position. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
When the need to abandon ship occurs, the lifeboat is boarded, crewmembers are strapped in their 
harnesses and its lowering is initiated by a coxswain from inside the boat. A single lever releases the 
gripes by causing the slip hook to rotate allowing the rings at the terminal ends of the gripes to fall off. 
Simultaneously  the  brake  is  released  and  the  boat  begins  to  lower.  As  the  boat  lowers,  the  gripes 
travel on the bollard.  
 
Because the ring at the free end of the gripe is larger than the circular outer edge of the bollard, the 
ring can catch the bollard. Level lowering will continue until the gripe takes the load at which point the 
end of the vessel which hasn’t snagged will continue to lower. The gripe may or may not break when 
the  lifeboat  begins  to  hang.  This  condition  is  unacceptable  and  may  contribute  to  the  loss  of  life 
during emergency evacuations or drills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and  operators  of  vessels  having  any  type  of 
webbing or wire cable used in a griping/securing system -  

•  contact the respective lifeboat manufacturers and class society representatives to find out what 

type of gripe entanglement incidents have been reported, and  

•  develop appropriate solutions that will minimize potential risks associated with such designs. 

  
The  IMO  Ship  Design  and  Equipment  Sub-Committee  has  recently  developed  a  draft  MSC  Circular 
related  to  this  subject,  which  should  be  approved  and  published  soon.  Included  in  the  draft  circular 
entitled "Guidance on Safety During Abandon Ship Drills Using Lifeboats" is the recommendation -- 
"To prevent lashings or gripes from getting entangled, check proper release before swinging out the 
davit." The Sub-Committee continues to work on long-range solutions.  
 
This material is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any existing domestic 
or  international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Specific  questions  regarding  this  safety 
alert  may  be  addressed  Mr.  Ken  Olsen  of  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis  at 
kolsen@comdt.uscg.mil  or  202.267.1417.  Technical  questions  regarding  other 
lifeboats  and 
emergency equipment or to report similar occurrences may be addressed to LT Todd Howard of the 
Coast Guard's Life Saving and Fire Safety Division at thoward@comdt.uscg.mil or 202.267.6854. 

 

 

