 

 

September 1, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 8-15 

 

ASLEEP AT THE WHEEL 

When fatigue catches up. 

 

the 

that 

captain 

shorelines 
commercial 

This  safely  alert  addresses  a  recent 
increase  in  the  number  of  groundings 
on  Alaskan 
involving 
uninspected 
fishing 
vessels.  Since  July  14,  2015,  a  total  of 
16  reported  groundings  have  occurred. 
In  a  number  of  investigations,  it  was 
learned 
or 
crewmembers  on  the  vessel  had  fallen 
asleep  at 
the  wheel  after  working 
extensive  hours  over  several  days.  
Fatigue may have been a causal factor 
in  many  of  these  instances.      Fatigue 
symptoms  are  not  limited  to  just  a 
person  falling  asleep.    Fatigue  issues 
are  strongly  related  to  human  errors 
and  poor  performance. 
  Nearly  all 
modes of transportation are impacted by fatigue and many studies have been performed about its 
negative short and long term effects.  
 
“The  International  Maritime  Organization  (IMO)  has  formulated  a  definition  of  fatigue  in  which 
fatigue  is  conceptualized  as  a  “reduction  in  physical  and/or  mental  capacity  as  the  result  of 
physical,  mental,  or  emotional  exertion  which  may  impair  nearly  all  physical  abilities  including 
strength, speed, reaction time, coordination, decision making or balance.” The IMO acknowledges 
the relation between fatigue and human error as indicated above.  Fatigue can also be divided into 
categories in many different ways.  However, systematic studies seem to find between three and 
five  dimensions,  including  general  fatigue  (e.g.,  tired,  bushed,  exhausted),  mental  fatigue  (e.g., 
cognitive impairment), physical fatigue, sleepiness with a tendency to fall asleep, and sometimes 
lack  of  motivation  or  complacency.    In  very  general  terms,  fatigue  and  its  ill  effects  can  be 
minimized by persons receiving periods of good quality uninterrupted rest.”  For additional fatigue 
research related information, access http://tinyurl.com/fishingfatigue. 
 
Crewmembers often work long hours on fishing vessels, performing physically demanding tasks in 
harsh environments.  Crewmembers may not be afforded sufficient time for recuperative sleep to 
prevent  the  development  of  acute  fatigue  due  to  vessel  navigation  and  fishing  or  process 
demands.  Many of the processes onboard a vessel must occur in a timely fashion and particular 

Safety Alert 8-15 

 

order.  Skipping one element at a certain point of time may have negative economic impacts.  For 
example, providing a six-hour rest period in lieu of dropping another set of crab pots would likely 
be an industry anomaly and result in a reduction of revenue for a specific period of time. 
 
Captains  and  crewmembers  are  generally  not  assured  a  rest  period  at  any  specific  time  or  in  a 
scheduled manner.  In addition to the fishing element of business, the vessel must be continuously 
navigated and herein is the problem.  The captain in command of the vessel has to be aware of his 
own degradation of mental and physical capabilities and at the same time ensure that his relief on 
the wheel (if any at all) has had an adequate period of rest in order to safely navigate the vessel. 
Similarly  for  other  crewmembers,  monitoring  is  necessary  because  when  the  ill  effects  of  fatigue 
finally catch up to an individual, the results can be a procedural mistake, error in judgment, or an 
action/inaction  resulting  in  an  injury  or  death.    For  those  at  the  wheel,  the  consequences  of 
improperly navigating a vessel can be extreme including the following:  loss of life and injuries; loss 
of cargo, vessel or income; incurrence of repair and salvage costs; and harm to the environment.  
Such events can also potentially lead to fines, civil penalties, and criminal prosecutions.   
 
To prevent these types of casualties, the Coast Guard recommends that owners of fishing vessels 
take advantage of the existing technology that can help prevent persons from falling asleep at the 
helm.    Such  technology  may  include  the  installation  of  watchstander  alarms  which  sound  and 
require silencing at preset intervals or the use of various safety and warning features  associated 
with  GPS,  Radar,  depth  sounding  and  other  electronic  equipment.    However,  it  is  critically 
important  that  such  equipment  should  only  be  used  as  backup  measures  and  not  as  a 
methodology to facilitate a navigator’s sleep while underway. 
 
The best defense against a fatigue-related navigation casualty is a well-rested 
watchstander  who  is  later  relieved  by  another  watchstander  that  has  had 
adequate time to sleep.   
 
The  Coast  Guard  recommends  that  all  fishing  vessel  owners  and  captains  learn  about  Crew 
Endurance  Management,  which  is  a  system  for  managing  the  risk  factors  in  maritime  work 
environments  that  can  lead  to  human  error  and  performance  degradation.  For  very  general 
information: http://tinyurl.com/cgcempamp, for more detailed data:  http://tinyurl.com/cgdatacem. 
 
An additional resource that explains methods and options to achieve crew endurance management 
is Maritime New Zealand’s Guide to Fatigue Management for Fishing Boats.  It is available here:  
http://tinyurl.com/nzfishfatigue. 
  
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  or  create  any 
domestic  operational  or  material  requirements.    Developed  by  U.S.  Coast  Guard  Sector 
Anchorage,  Marine  Safety  Unit  Valdez  and  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis, 
Washington, DC.  For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

