         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

November 9, 2015 
Washington, DC 

 

 Safety Alert 11-15 
 

 

DRIED NOT FRIED 
Laundering safety issues. 

included 

they  were  not 

inspections  and  evaluations  of 

 
Owners  and  operators  of  vessels  employing  large  laundry  operations  and  extra-large-capacity 
drying  machines  are  warned  of  the  potential  fire  hazards  this  equipment  poses.  They  are  also 
encouraged to be aware of and familiar with the equipment and all associated safety systems and 
to ensure these systems are properly maintained and operational. 
 
Recently  a  small  fire  developed  in  a  dryer  onboard  a 
cruise  ship.  The  fire  was  quickly  extinguished  by  the 
vessel’s  crew  and  caused  no  significant  damage.  
Subsequently,  it  was  discovered  that  a  built-in  fire 
suppression  system,  a  component  of 
the  dryers 
designed  to  spray  water  into  the  drums  in  case  of  fire, 
had  been  disabled  on  all  six  of  the  vessel’s  installed 
dryers.  Initial  investigation  of  the  associated  processes 
and  procedures  related  to  these  suppression  systems 
indicated 
in 
the  vessel’s 
maintenance systems such as “Infoship.”  
 
Regular 
fire 
suppression  equipment  did  not  occur,  despite  other 
excellent  laundry  room  risk  reduction  actions  routinely 
undertaken  by  the  crew.    Another  area  of  concern 
involved  the  shared  responsibility  for  inspection  and 
maintenance  of  the  laundry  equipment  by  two  sub-
departments:  Galley  Service  Technicians  and 
the 
Electrical  Department.    Their  specific  responsibilities  for 
this equipment were unclear. 
 
The  exact  cause  of  the  fire  is  unknown.    Highly  worn 
cleaning  cloths  were  being  dried  and  the  crew  reported 
that none of their routine cleaning fluids were considered 
flammable.  Investigators  suspect  that  a  minor  spark 
occurred due to a loose or disconnected wire, igniting lint 
in  the  spaces  under  the  dryer  and  then  the  rags  in  the 
dryer  drum.  Thermostats, 
thermistors,  and  other 
electrical components were destroyed, preventing a complete analysis of causal factors.  
 
Laundry systems and the normal production of dryer lint create significant fire hazards due to the 
flammability of the lint.  Nearly two decades ago, a fire occurred on a cruise ship due to a welding 
spark  igniting  lint.    As  a  result,  operators  have  developed  dryer  fire  prevention  procedures  that 

this 

1 

Safety Alert 12-15 

 

describe  the  exact  process  for  securing  the  equipment  and  cleaning  the  machine’s  internal  and 
external areas.  
 
Naval publications indicate that the majority of dryer fires are caused by spontaneous combustion 
of  residual  soils,  paint,  edible  oils,  etc.  Furthermore,  they  are  also  caused  by  human  errors  or 
negligence such as leaving dried materials unattended in the dryer; not properly washing, rinsing 
and  extracting  clothes;  not  cooling  down  dryer  loads  for  ten  minutes  at  ambient  temperatures; 
improper  cleaning  lint  traps;  and  damaged  lint  traps.  Other  important  concerns  are  the  need  for 
properly  operating  automatic  temperature  controls,  timing  devices,  cool  down  cycles  and  the 
absence  of  fire  sensing  and  smothering  devices.    The  involved  dryer  in  this  case  was  equipped 
with all of these components. 
 
Although  the  impact  of  this  incident  was  relatively  small,  if  not  for  the  response  of  the  vessel’s 
crewmembers and firefighters, the outcome could have been much worse.  As a result, the Coast 
Guard recommends that owners and operators having similar industrial sized drying equipment: 
 

Identify and maintain all associated safety equipment and extinguishing systems; 

•  Re-evaluate the risks associated with the equipment; 
• 
•  Establish clear lines of responsibility for equipment inspections, maintenance, and repair;  
•  Prohibit all personnel from overriding safety components; and  
•  Consider the necessity of additional signage and instructions in proper languages. 

 

 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Special  thanks  to  the  Prevention 
Department of Sector Jacksonville and LT John Nee.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis,  Washington  DC. 
to  
HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
 
Naval Signage Example: 

  Questions  may  be  sent 

WARNING 

 
SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION CAN OCCUR IN FRESHLY LAUNDERED ITEMS WITHIN 1 TO 
4 HOURS AFTER COMPLETION OF DRYING CYCLE. THIS MAY BE DUE TO A COMBINATION 
OF HIGH TEMPERATURES AND SOIL RESIDUE. 
 
TO PREVENT FIRES: 
 

1)  ACCOMPLISH ALL LAUNDRY CYCLES. 

 

2)  ENSURE  THAT  ALL  DRYER  LOADS  RECEIVE  A  FINAL  10  MINUTE  TUMBLING  WITH 
DAMPERS  SET  TO  DELIVER  AIR  AT  AMBIENT  ROOM  TEMPERATURE.    (Cool  down 
period.) 
 

3)  REMOVE  ALL  LAUNDERED  ITEMS  FROM  DRYER  WHEN  THE  DRYER  CYCLE  IS 

COMPLETED. 
 

4)  OVERHAUL  ALL  DRYER  LOADS  TO  PREVENT  RESIDUAL  HEAT  BUILDUP.  DO  NOT 

LEAVE LAUNDRY UNMANNED UNTIL THIS HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED. 

2 

 

 

