           

 
September 9, 2014   
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

              Alert 09-14 

 AIR DRAFT IS CRITICAL! 

 

  Statistically, 

Air draft (draught) is a term used to describe the distance from the top of a vessel’s highest point to its 
waterline.    Vertical  clearance  is  the  distance  in  excess  of  the  air  draft  that  allows  a  vessel  to  pass 
safely  under  a  bridge  or  object.    The  consequences  of  failing  to  consider  air  draft  and  to  properly 
calculate a vessel’s vertical clearance under bridges, power lines, and other obstructions encountered 
during a passage can be catastrophic. 
 
Over the last eleven years, overhead 
bridge strikes account for 1.2% of all 
vessel  allisions  investigated  by  the 
U. S. Coast Guard.  That equates to 
205 incidents, all of which involved a 
fixed,  swing,  lift  or  draw  bridge.  
Over  the  same  time  period  there 
were  several  more  incidents  where 
vessels  have  allided  with  power 
cables  and  other  types  of  overhead 
obstructions. 
towing 
vessels  and  barges  are  the  most 
likely to be involved in bridge strikes 
where  air  draft  is  a  factor.    Barges 
equipped  with  or  that  carry  land 
based  cranes  not  properly  stowed 
and  those  fitted  with  mooring  spuds 
not  properly  adjusted  are  the  most 
commonly involved components in overhead bridge allisions.  These incidents have resulted in loss of 
life, millions of dollars in property damage, and inconvenience to entire communities who rely on the 
bridges and power cables. 
  
The primary causal factor associated with these casualties was the lack of accurate air draft data for 
either  the  towing  vessel  or  its  tow  being  made  available  to  the  responsible  Master  or  Mate.  
Knowledge  of  a  vessel’s  air  draft  is  a  critical  component  in  determining  whether  a  vessel  can  pass 
safely under a bridge or overhead structure.   
 
The Navigation Safety Regulations found in 33 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 164 require 
the  owner,  master  or  operator  of  each  vessel  underway  to  ensure  the  following:  that  the  person 
directing  and  controlling  the  movement  of  the  vessel  understands  the  limitations  and  constraints  of 
their vessel(s) and tows, that they have knowledge of tides, currents, and dangers posed by visual or 
radar contacts, and that the vessel proceeds at a safe speed at all times.  
  
Title  46  CFR  15.405  requires  that  each  credentialed  individual  be  familiar  with  the  relevant 
characteristics  of  the  vessel  on  which  engaged,  prior  to  assuming  his  or  her  duties.   This  includes, 
 
 

be 

not 

among  other  things,  the  general  arrangement  of  the  vessel.   The  term  “general  arrangement  of  the 
vessel” would include such details as overall length, breadth, deepest draft and air draft for both the 
towing vessel and any vessel(s) being towed.  
 
The 
regulations  which  govern 
drawbridge  operations  are  found  in 
33 CFR Part 117.  They require that 
drawbridges 
opened 
unnecessarily.    Before  signaling  for 
a  bridge  to  be  opened,  a  vessel 
owner or operator must determine if 
the  vertical  clearance  is  sufficient, 
after 
vessel 
components  that  are  not  essential 
to navigation have been lowered, to 
pass  safely  under  the  bridge  in  the 
closed  position.    However,  once  it 
has been determined that safe passage can only be carried out by opening the bridge; drawbridges 
must open promptly and fully for the passage of the vessel. 
 
Due  to  the  frequency  of  overhead  bridge  allisions  in  the  recent  past,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly 
recommends that owners or operators of vessels ensure that:   
 

lowerable 

all 

•  Every officer in charge of a navigational watch  know the air draft of his/her vessel and tow and 
also know how to apply that knowledge using the resources available to him/her regarding the 
height and location of bridges, power lines, pipe lines and other elevated objects located within 
the navigable channel. 

 
•  Assumptions  are  not  made  regarding  a  vessel  or  its  cargo’s  “air  draft”  or  of  “bridge  heights”. 

Specific data must be known when planning transits. 

 
This  Safety Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    It  was  developed  by  the  Towing  Vessel 
National Center of Expertise and the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis.   For questions or 
concerns  please  visit 
the  Towing  Vessel  National  Center  of  Expertise  web  site 
(www.uscg.mil/TVNCOE) and click on the “About Us” tab under TVNCOE Home. 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

2 

