 
 
 
 
 

October 26, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 16-16 

Be Alarmed By All Alarms 

Correct Steering Gear & Other Nuisance Alarms Immediately! 

 
Recently  in  the  Pacific  North  West,  Coast  Guard  marine  inspectors  experienced  two  different 
circumstances involving the alarm and control system of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries steering gears 
onboard relatively new vessels.  Although neither event resulted in a marine casualty, they serve as a 
reminder  to  the  potentially  dangerous  results  that  may  occur  when  an  alarm  system  is  deliberately 
ignored.  A false sense of operational safety develops when crewmembers continually silence what 
they consider to be a “nuisance alarm,” enabling a false perception of normalcy to develop.  

Inspectors  observed  on  two  vessels  that  repetitive  alarms  occurred  every  time  crewmembers 
performed steering tests that attempted to move the rudder through its range of motion.   The alarms 
indicated that “hydraulic lock” events had occurred.  Each time, the alarm was simply acknowledged 
by the crew and the steering gear adequately moved the rudder.  However, no further investigation 
was conducted to identify the cause of the alarm.   

Solenoid Valves 

DCV  Block / Body 

The  part  of  the  hydraulic  system  that  causes  the 
movement of the steering gear’s rams involves a 
Directional  Control  Valve  (DCV),  which  is  a 
hydraulic  shuttle  valve.    A  set  of  solenoid  valves 
receive  an  electrical  signal  from  the  bridge  helm 
or autopilot, which causes the flow of oil to certain 
sections of the shuttle valve.  The DCV shifts and 
initiates  flow  to  the  system’s  hydraulic  rams 
dependent on  the  command.   If  the  shuttle  valve 
does  not  shift  or  is  not  sensed  as  having  shifted 
after  a  period  of  time,  an  alarm  on  the  bridge 
console  activates.    The  devices  that  sense  the 
movement of the main shuttle valve are proximity 
switches.  They do not physically touch the ends 
of  the  shuttle  valve  but  instead  magnetically 
sense  its  presence.    In  each  of  the  two  cases 
profiled  here,  the  proximity  switches  were  faulty 
and required replacement.  Ignoring the problem meant that although the rudder moved as expected 
in  these  two  cases,  the  lack  of  properly  functioning  proximity  switches  might  result  in  a  failure  to 
detect if the rudder had not moved, since crewmembers had trained themselves to ignore the alarm.  

Proximity Switches 

It is well known that close calls and near misses occur more frequently than actual incidents.  In this 
instance, the systems and alarms forewarned the operators of a problem.  By ignoring the alarms, the 
crewmembers accepted a higher level of risk and reduced their safety margins.  If the situation had 
been  allowed  to  persist  indefinitely,  an  unwanted  incident  could  have  occurred  with  potentially  dire 
consequences.  

 

 

 

1 of 2 

Safety Alert 16 -16 

 

As  the  result  of  these  events,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owner  and  operators 
ensure the following: 

•  address  the  management  of  nuisance  alarms  in  Safety  Management  Systems  and  require  

• 

immediate correction of their specific causes; and 
 
Include  strict  prohibitions  against  the  pinning  or  securing  of  alarm  acknowledgment  buttons 
and switches.  Such actions should be deemed as unacceptable corrective measures as they 
have contributed to serious marine casualties in the past. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational, or material requirements.  Developed by the Inspection Department 
of  the  Marine  Safety  Unit  Portland,  OR  and  the  Coast  Guard  Headquarters  Office  of  Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis.  Questions or comments may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

******* 

 

 

2 

