 
 
 
 
October 16, 2009                                                                                                Lessons Learned 01-09 
Washington, DC 

MARINE INVESTIGATIONS 
                   LESSONS LEARNED 

SMALL FIRE / IMPORTANT LESSONS 

 

This  document  presents  recent  lessons  learned  resulting  from  a  casualty  investigation  and  may  be 
useful to vessel owners and operators in addition to marine inspection personnel. 
 
Recently  in  the  North  East  an  83  foot  long  passenger  ferry  which  has  the  capacity  to  carry  306 
persons experienced a small engine room fire.  The vessel was just off its dock at the time the fire 
started and onboard were 110 persons.  Because of the nearness to the dock, the vessel’s Captain 
chose  to  disembark  the  passengers  prior  to  manually  activating  the  engine  room  CO2  system  and 
closing  the  main  fuel  stop  valve.    The  CO2  system  extinguished  the  fire  and  when  the  local  fire 
department  arrived  later  they  found  the  port  main  engine’s  exhaust  insulation  smoldering.    Using  a 
fire  hose  to  cool  the  area  they  completely  extinguished  the  fire.    Although  the  casualty  is  still  being 
investigated, it appears that the fire was caused by a leaking pipe fitting attached to the fuel oil filter of 
the center engine. Fuel sprayed from the rear of the center engine to the port main engine exhaust 
piping and ignited. 
 
Polypropylene or PVC Components 

the  engine 

 
The  engine  room  utilized  vents  to  provide 
air  for  the  engines  and  cooling.    There 
were  no  forced  supply  fans  or  exhaust 
systems.    Slots  in  the  ceiling  at  the 
outboard  sides  of 
room, 
forward  and  aft,  provided  the  openings  to 
four  ducts  which  contained  dampers.  The 
damper closed against the slotted opening 
located  in  the  floor  of  the  duct  (ceiling  of 
machinery  space)  when  the  CO2  system 
was  activated.    In  normal  circumstances, 
airflow  from  the  outside  could  flow  past  a 
moisture  eliminating  filter,  into  the  duct 
area,  past  the  open  damper,  through  the 
slot and into the engine room.  Depending 
on weather conditions, air could enter one 
side  of  the  vessel  and  exit  the  other.  
When the extinguishing system was activated, all the dampers closed properly.  However, after the 
fire it was noted that several external moisture eliminator filters were extremely damaged. The photo 
above shows an undamaged moisture eliminating filter.  The actual size of this filter is about five feet 
by fifteen inches. 
 
The following photo shows the melted moisture eliminating filter from the opposite side of the vessel.  
High temperature gases flowed through it during the fire causing it to overheat and deform prior to its 
respective damper closing.  It fell on top of the damper after the damper had closed.  The small fire in 
the engine room was about nineteen feet away on the other side of the vessel and aft.  Investigators 

noted that if the filter had melted and fallen on or into the slot of the duct before the damper closed, it 
is likely to have interfered with the damper operation and possibly have reduced the effectiveness of 
the CO2 system. 
 
 

the  operation  of 

 46  CFR  116.610  (b)  applicable  to  this 
vessel, states that “a ventilation duct, and 
materials incidental to installation must be 
made  of  noncombustible  material.”    46 
CFR 116.610(c) states that “combustibles 
and  other 
foreign  materials  are  not 
allowed within ventilation ducts.  However 
metal piping and electrical wiring installed 
in  a  metal  protective  enclosure  may  be 
installed  within  ventilation  ducts,  provided 
that the piping or wiring does not interfere 
with 
fire  dampers.” 
Owners and operators of any type vessel, 
as well as those persons involved with the 
inspection  of  vessels  should  be  aware  of 
the potential risks associated with this and 
similar installations and are reminded that 
inspections of fire dampers should include observation of all related structure near dampers to ensure 
that  the  dampers  will  operate  under  fire  conditions.  These  structures  and  any  incidental  materials 
should not be made of combustible material.  On vessels with manual extinguishing systems, or those 
with  manual  dampers  whereby  when  securing  the  ventilation  time  is  of  the  essence,  consideration 
needs to be given regarding the materials used should it be subjected to excessive heat carried by 
high temperature gases. 
 
 
Failed Pipe Fittings 
 
As stated previously, the investigation into 
this  casualty  is  not  yet  complete.    The 
components of the pipe fitting which failed 
are  currently  being  examined  by  NTSB 
metallurgists. It is suspected however that 
the 
fittings  may  have  been 
subjected  to  excessive  vibration  which 
could  have  caused  the  fracture.    The 
original  configuration  was  modified  by 
adding  a 
two 
additional  sensors  (for  a  total  of  four)  to 
the fuel filter assembly and was subject to 
pressures  up  to  65  psig  or  greater.    The 
assembly  weighed  6.3  ounces  and 
extended about 4 inches out of a reducing 
bushing  that  was  threaded  into  the  inlet 
fitting of the filter. Because of the location 
of  the  fire  and  oil  soaked  insulation  it  is 

that  attached 

fitting 

failed 

suspected that the fitting leaked first and did not immediately shear as shown in the photo at the right.    
 
Owners  and  operators  of  any  type  vessel,  as  well  as  those  persons  involved  with  the  inspection  of 
vessels  should  be  aware  of  the  potential  risks  associated  by  adding  components  to  an  engine 
assembly  and  must  take  into  account  the  effect  of  vibration  on  those  components.  If  add–on 
components are discovered effort should be made to verify the adequacy and safety of the installation 
by consulting the engine manufacturers and designers. 
 
In this instance an improved installation may have involved mounting the sensors directly to a stable 
surface and attaching the sensors to the filter inlet using a flexible hose.   
 
Hot Spots 
 

In a small engine room containing several 
engines  and  having  a  low  overhead  there 
are  a  number  of  locations  that  present 
enough  heat  to  cause  a  fuel  to  flash  and 
ignite  other  components.    Turbocharger 
and exhaust piping insulation while serving 
to  reduce  heating  of  external  areas  also 
helps  reduce  the  immediate  availability  of 
ignition hot spots. Care should be taken to 
ensure  insulation  wraps  and  blankets  are 
kept  tight  and  fastened  in  a  manner  to 
prevent  dripping  or  spraying  fluids  from 
traveling 
to  an  exposed  hot  spot.  
Insulation  seams  should  be  made  tight 
and where possible aligned in a manner to 
prevent  pooling  of 
to  repel 
dripping.  Likewise  good  marine  practice 
may  also  dictate  and  ensure  that  braces 
which  are  welded  directly  to  the  exhaust 
pipe  which  serve  as  hangers  or  supports 
also be insulated. Heat conducting from the exhaust pipe to the brace could be substantial allowing 
the exposed bracket to become nearly as hot as the exhaust pipe.  The brace in the photo above was 
only  partially  covered  with  the  insulation  that  was  wrapped  around  the  exhaust    pipe.  As  with  the 
other concerns in this document, owners and operators of any type vessel, as well as those persons 
involved  with  the  inspection  of  vessels  should  be  aware  of  the  potential  risks  associated  with 
improper or inadequate installation of insulation. 
 
Additional fire protection information is provided in 1)  NVIC 9-97 “Guide To Structural Fire Protection” 
available 
IMO  Maritime  Safety 
Committee MSC.1/Circ.1321 11 June 2009, “GUIDELINES FOR MEASURES TO PREVENT FIRES 
IN ENGINE-ROOMS AND CARGO PUMP-ROOMS.” Copies available upon request. 
 
This  document  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC.    Questions  can  be 
addressed to Mr. Ken Olsen at kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil. 

  http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/nvic/pdf/1997/n9-97.pdf 

  and  2) 

fluid  and 

