August 19, 2015 
Washington, D1C 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 07-15 
 

 

PREVENT PARASAIL ACCIDENTS 

Follow ASTM Standards and manufacturer instructions! 

This  Safety  Alert  serves  as  a  reminder  to  owners,  operators  and  crewmembers  working  on  all 
parasail  vessels  to  review  equipment  instructions  and  usage  limitations.  Significant  hazards 
leading to injury or death may occur if the equipment is used improperly.  The Coast Guard does 
not  regulate  parasail  equipment,  parasail  operational  procedures  or  mechanical  systems  used 
during  parasailing.    This  is  a  reminder  to  owners,  operators  and  crewmembers  of  their  important 
responsibilities. 
 
This alert focuses on the proper fitting of the “seat type” body harness, which is used to support a 
parasail  passenger  while  in  flight.    The  seat  of  the  harness  is  constructed  of  a  band  of  high 
strength material.  These harnesses are typically produced in a range of sizes to support children 
and  adults.    They  are  designed  to  be  used  with  U.S.  Coast  Guard  approved  Personal  Flotation 
Devices (PFD).  The preferred type of PFD for parasailing is a vest style having flotation padding 
front  and  back  and  a  number  of  securing  straps.    PFDs  of  the  horseshoe  style  that  fit  around  a 
passenger’s neck and in front are less desired. 
 
Manufacturer  harness  product  information,  safety  data  regarding  the  fitting  of  harnesses  from 
industry  associations,  and  the  ASTM  International  Standard  Practices  for  Parasailing  F-3099-14 
each indicate the following: 

 

 

HARNESS WAIST STRAP MUST FIT AROUND THE PASSENGER’S 

WAIST AND NOT OVER THE LIFE JACKET (OR PFD). 

 
The  references  also  state  that  when  fitting  a  passenger  into  the  harness,  its  back  strap  must  be 
above the user’s hips.  The waist strap must then be made tight and the straps should not be able 
to move over and below the hips.  The strap should be tight to prevent the passenger from sliding 
out  of  the  harness  and  keep  the  person  correctly  positioned  on  the  seat  of  the  harness.    No 
additional information has been found to suggest different methods to fit seat type harnesses. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners,  operators  and  crewmembers  of  parasail 
vessels thoroughly examine: 
 

•  The  ASTM  “Standard  Practices  for  Parasailing  F-3099-14.    This  standard  addresses 
Weather,  Equipment,  Operations,  Crew  Requirements  and  Patron  Responsibilities.  It  is 
available here:  http://www.astm.org/Standards/F3099.htm . 

 
•  Related  equipment  manufacturer 

• 

 
Instructions  and  procedures  regarding  fitting  passengers  into  harnesses  to  ensure  the 
proper positioning of the harness on the wearer. 

instructions 

(harnesses,  chutes,  winch,  etc.). 

 

Safety Alert 7-15 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

ASTM Standards and harness manufacturers recommend fitting 
the waist strap around the waist as depicted above. 

ASTM Standards and harness manufacturers DO NOT recommend fitting 

parasailing waist straps above the PFD as depicted above. 

 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  or  create  any 
domestic or international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by Coast Guard 
Eighth  District  Prevention,  Sector  St.  Petersburg  Investigation  Division,  Office  of  Commercial 
Vessel  Compliance,  and  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis,  Washington,  DC.  
Questions  may  be  addressed  to  HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil.    Distributed  by  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Casualty Analysis, Washington DC.  
 

2 

