  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 8, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

USE OF HATCHES IN WET FISH HOLDS ON CFVs 

      Safety Alert 09-96 
 

Commercial  fishing  vessel  operators  cross  rigging  their  vessels  for  fisheries  that  require  a  "wet"  (flooded) 
fish holds are advised to carefully inspect hatches which may be located in the fish hold to ensure that they 
are designed for use in under water applications, and if installed, to ensure that they are in good condition. 
U.S.  Coast  Guard  personnel  have  recently  observed  a  number  of  trawlers  rigged  for  mid  water  herring 
trawling with aluminum hatch covers installed in the fish hold deck to provide access to the vessel's shaft 
alley. These vessels, normally employed in the ground fishery, have operated with "dry" fish holds. In this 
service minimal weight is placed on the hatch covers. When these vessels are utilized for mid water herring 
trawling, the weight of the water and fish stowed above the hatch cover places tremendous weight onto the 
aluminum hatch covers in the fish hold deck. Not all aluminum hatches are designed for service where they 
are  placed  under  water  or  under  significant  load  for  extended  periods  of  time.  Operators  of  vessels  fitted 
with aluminum hatches designed to withstand this service should carefully inspect shaft alley hatches and 
ensure that the hatches are not damaged, and that the hatch dogs are properly adjusted so that the hatch 
fits securely to the deck ring without distortion.  

The  failure  of  a  shaft  alley  hatch  while  the  vessel  is  loaded  would  result  in  the 
dropping  of  water  and  herring  into  the  shaft  alley.  This  could  create  a  free 
surface condition in the fish hold. If the vessel did not have a watertight bulkhead 
between  the  shaft  alley  and  the  engine  room,  the  loss  of  a  shaft  alley  hatch 
would result in a dangerous shift of water and fish into the vessel's engine space. 

 

Depending on the configuration of the vessel, the loss of a shaft alley 
hatch  cover  may  also  result  in  a  transverse  shift  of  weight,  which 
would  create  a  heeling  moment  (list).  While  longitudinal  bulkheads 
are  considered  extremely  important  in  safe  operation  of  '"Wet  hold" 
vessels,  the  loss  of  a  shaft  alley  hatch  from  one  fish  hold 
compartment  might  create  an  exceptionally  dangerous  condition  for 
deeply loaded vessels.  

This  hatch  cover's  broken  dog  handle  indicates  damage  that  may  affect 
performance  of  the  hatch.  Commercial  fishermen  operating  in  fisheries 
requiring wet fish holds are requested to contact the manufacturers of hatch 
covers installed in their fish holds to ensure that they are designed for use 
in  wet  holds.  If  your  hatch  cover  manufacturer  advises  you  that  their 
hatches are designed for that service, request the manufacturer's inspection 
and adjustment instructions to ensure that the hatch is in top condition.  

 

 

 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

