  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 5, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

COLD WATER BOATING ADVISORY 

      Safety Alert 05-96 
 

U.S.  Coast  Guard  Marine  Safety  Office  Portland,  Maine  advises  recreational  and  commercial  boaters 
operating  their  vessels  in  spring  and  early  summer  that  despite  the  warm  weather  conditions,  sea  water 
temperatures  in  northern  New  England  waters  remain  quite  cold  and  present  the  very  real  danger  of 
hypothermia in the event of accidental immersion.  
 
Hypothermia is a condition where a body's core temperature is reduced to levels where the individual will 
experience  loss  of  motor  control  and  in  many  cases,  risk  death.  In  the  very  cold  water  conditions  found 
along  the  northern  New  England  coast,  individuals  experiencing  accidental  immersion  without  full  body 
protection  from  dry  suits  or  wet  suits  will  experience  symptoms  of  hypothermia  usually  within  a  matter  of 
minutes.  
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that all persons operating on the water in spring and early summer 
take steps to minimize the risk of accidental immersion, and to develop a personal emergency plan in the 
event of immersion, which should include:  

•  The ability to maintain buoyancy.  
•  The ability to quickly exit the water.  
•  The ability to summon assistance if you cannot exit the water.  
•  The ability to preserve body heat while waiting for assistance.  
•  The ability to rewarm after exiting the water.  

Maintaining  Buoyancy:  The  best  way  to  ensure  buoyancy  is  to  wear  some  type  of  personal  flotation 
device (PFD) at all times while on or near the water. Your choice of PFD should be based on your size and 
activity engaged in. Make sure you PFD is comfortable to wear and is in good repair. Some types of PFD-s, 
such as inflatable flotation coats, are not USCG approved. While these devices may not meet the stringent 
requirements for your vessel's primary lifesaving equipment, they still might be perfectly adequate to use as 
a wearable flotation aid.  
 
Exiting the Water: If accidentally immersed in cold water you should immediately remove as much of your 
body from the water as possible. Ideally, you should attempt to reboard your boat. If your vessel is equipped 
with a Skill switch" which stops the engine if you fall overboard make sure it is properly used. You may want 
to consider towing an emergency boarding ladder behind your vessel to assist in reboarding.  
 
Summoning Assistance: Every boater should have a whistle to summon assistance on their person at all 
times. If operating at night. every person should be equipped with a floating marker light, preferably a small 
strobe  light.  Do  not  plan  on  yelling  for  help,  it  requires  too  much  precious  energy  and  your  ability  to  yell 
loudly will fade as your body cools. If operating away from other boats, consider carrying a small personal 
flare kit to summon assistance. Rewarming after exiting the water: When ever you are near cold water for 
work or pleasure you should always have a blanket or change of clothes to rewarm your body. Find the time 
to take a first aid course and learn how to help others who may be experiencing hvpothermia.  
 
Preserving  Body  Heat:  When  immersed  in  cold  water  you  must  preserve  your  strength  and  reduce  the 
flow of cold water across your body. If possible remove any part of your body from the water. Anti-Exposure 

1 

Coveralls,  which  are  full  body  PFD's,  are  particularly  effective  in  preserving  body  heat,  and  provide 
improved  bouyancy  too.  If  possible,  wear  a  wool  hat  while  boating  to  help  preserve  heat  loss  from  your 
head.  Take  the  time  to  learn  cold  water  survival  techniques  from  the  Red  Cross  or  other  water  safety 
organization. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

