  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 14, 2002 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

 

The Incident 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

MAN OVERBOARD 

      Safety Alert 10-02 
 

The following information is a product of the Seventeenth Coast Guard District's Fishing Vessel 
Safety Program. The lessons learned related to this alert may be applicable to other segments of 
maritime industry.  

A 138 foot catcher/processor vessel had been assisting in the search for two missing 
crewmembers from another catcher/processor that had caught fire and exploded two days earlier. 
It became apparent to the master of vessel that the Coast Guard would soon be suspending the 
search as the weather deteriorated to 30 foot seas and 50 knot winds.  

The master decided to seek shelter in Dutch Harbor, Alaska and deliver the two survivors they had 
previously rescued. In addition to the survivors, they had picked up the survival craft to the 
damaged vessel and secured it on deck. However, as they headed for Dutch Harbor it broke loose 
and started shifting around. 

Three crewmembers were sent out to secure the craft and prevent it from going overboard. While 
the men were securing the equipment, a large wave broke across the deck and swept one 
individual overboard. A second crewman was also caught by the same wave but saved himself by 
grabbing hold of the vessel's railing. 

The missing crewman was wearing black rain gear and no flotation aids. Although a search was 
performed the master and crew were unable to locate and rescue the missing crewman. The Coast 
Guard was also notified and launched a helicopter from St. Paul. The aerial search was 
unsuccessful and hindered by snow squalls and half mile visibility.  

Lessons Learned 

Although the specific cause of the casualty remains under investigation, there are "Ready for Sea" 
safety factors that are relevant to this incident and several "lessons learned." 

•  Wear a personal flotation device (PFD) when working or moving around on deck. Even if 

you only expect to be on deck for a few minutes, grab a PFD and put it over your rain gear. 
Or wear an inflatable PFD. If you fall overboard, at least you'll stay afloat.  

•  Sew or glue retroreflective tape to outerwear-rain gear, work jackets, sweat shirts, etc. Light 

will reflect off the reflective tape providing a more visible target for rescuers.  

1 

•  Wear bright colors when you must work on deck. Choose bright, contrasting colors that will 

easily catch someone's eye. It could mean the difference in someone spotting you or not 
amongst the waves.  

•  Wear a light on your PFD or clothing - or carry one that can be pinned on in an emergency. 
Search efforts at night or in inclement weather are very challenging for searchers. Anything 
that you can do to attract attention to yourself, such as having a bright strobe light on, will 
aid rescuers in quickly finding you. And in the Bering Sea, every minute matters!  

•  Wear a safety harness when the weather is extreme and you must go out on deck. Rig 
safety lines in exposed areas on deck. It is not uncommon to lose your footing in heavy 
breaking seas, and the safety line may be the one thing that keeps you from going over the 
side!  

•  Properly secure fishing gear and survival equipment.  
•  Thoroughly analyze the risk when weighing the importance of saving material items. 

Equipment can be replaced - a life cannot.  

Questions regarding this incident may be addressed to Ms. Sue Jorgensen at 
sjorgensen@cgalaska.uscg.mil.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

 

2 

