 

March 3, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 Safety Alert 3-15 

 

LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) 

 Cargo and Hydrate Handling Risks 

 

This  Safety  Alert  serves  as  a  reminder  to  all  Gas  Carrier  owners  and  operators  of  the  importance  of 
ensuring all personnel follow approved Safety Management System cargo handling procedures and industry 
best  practices.    It  recommends  that  owner  operators  ensure  all  shipboard  personnel  associated  with  the 
handling of cargo are familiar with all existing procedures to reduce casualty risks.  Further, it recommends 
that when shipboard personnel identify cargo or safety concerns that they inform facility personnel prior to 
commencing loading or immediately after an issue is noted during cargo transfers. 
 
Recently, the Coast Guard investigated a fire that occurred in a cargo compressor room onboard a foreign 
flagged  Liquefied  Petroleum  Gas  (LPG)  Carrier.    Investigators  suspect  that  unsafe  cargo  handling 
procedures associated with manual draining of hydrates from the drain line on the outlet of re-liquefaction 
condensers  directly  contributed  to  this  casualty.    Hydrates  are  compounds,  in  the  form  of  crystalline 
substances,  developed  from  the  interaction  of  water  and  hydrocarbons  at  certain  pressures  and 
temperatures.    They  are  commonly  present  in  LPG  cargoes  and  must  be  safely  managed  throughout  the 
cargo  system.    Hydrates,  if  not  removed,  can  result  in  frozen  regulating  valves,  clogged  filters,  damaged 
equipment, and other problems in the related cargo systems.  
 
In  the  incident  under  investigation,  the  LPG  being  loaded  was  at  a  higher  temperature  than  the  operator 
desired for transit.  In order to cool the LPG cargo, the gas was re-liquefied to a lower temperature by using 
the vessel’s boil off system.   The gas was directed from the tank to a compressor, compressed to a higher 
pressure, and then condensed back to a liquid at a lower temperature.  From the condenser it flowed back 
to  the  tank,  but  first  passed  through  an  expansion  valve.    It  was  reported  that  while  this  system  was 
operating, the piping near the expansion valve began constricting flow due to hydrates freezing.  This then 
caused an increase in system pressure from the expansion valve back via the condenser and to the outlet 
of the compressor.   
 
Crewmembers 
reported that a ball 
valve  at  a  sample 
a 
point 
condenser 
outlet 
piping was opened 
on  occasion 
to 
drain  the  hydrates 
into  a  modified 
bucket.  It was also 
that 
learned 
flanges 
the 
outlet  piping  of  the 
ball 
had 
been  removed  and  left  off.    Investigators  were  told  that  the  Cargo  Engineer  regularly  made  rounds  to 
manually drain the hydrates to the bucket in order to prevent the freezing of the expansion valve.  However, 
no buckets were found and significant accumulations of ice were noted in the bilge areas below the same 
sample point for two of the three liquid line drains. 

Directly Below Valve Flange 

End Blanks Previously Off 

Sample Valve (Ball Type) 

Ice Accumulation 

valve 

on 

in 

1 

Safety Alert 3-15 
Whether  or  not  buckets  were  used  to  capture  the  hydrates,  along  with  escaping  liquid  propane,  and  then 
later allowed to boil off as stated by the crew, or if the drains were left cracked on or just leaking, as they 
were found, may never  be exactly determined.  However, the ice formation in the bilge seems to indicate 
the latter was the more prevalent condition.  Regardless of either initial condition, a hazardous flammable 
atmosphere  developed.    With  the  doors  of  the  compressor  room  clearly  labeled  to  be  kept  closed,  but 
latched  open,  it  is  likely  that  proper  air  flow  and  volumetric  air  changes  in  the  space  did  not  occur.    It  is 
speculated by crewmembers that a fallen flange blank may have provided the initial spark that ignited the 
gas.    A  fire  subsequently  developed  and  destroyed  electrical  cabling  and  gaskets  associated  with  the 
condenser.  It was extinguished quickly by a crewmember who was in the space at the time, using handheld 
dry chemical extinguishers. 
 
There were also other concerns identified during this investigation.  The following additional concerns focus 
primarily on procedures that existed or were absent prior to the incident: an emergency system left in the 
manual mode prevented remote activation; senior organizational personnel for the operator and facility were 
not  informed  of  the  hydrate  situations;  procedures  for  taking  actions  when  gas  alarms  sounded  were  not 
followed; and gas detection devices were not properly calibrated. 
 
The  importance  of  Safety  Management  Systems  and  Operational  Manuals  to  be  totally  inclusive  of  all 
routine  vessel  processes  and  procedures  cannot  be  overstated.    Although  every  scenario  that  involves 
decision making of officers and crewmembers cannot be documented, it is reasonable to expect that those 
procedures that are part of day-to-day operations are documented.   
 
As a result of this casualty the Coast Guard strongly recommends that: 
 

•  Senior  shore  side  operating  company  personnel  provide  extensive  technical  support  when  a 
vessel is required to load cargo at higher temperatures and when substantial hydrates quantities 
are known to be contained within; 

•  Shipboard Safety Management Systems and Operational Manuals be inclusive of all procedures 
to  be  expected  and  performed  onboard.    In  the  incident  under  investigation  a  procedure  for 
removal of hydrates was unavailable; 

•  Such  procedures,  when  they  are  developed,  implemented,  and  performed  should  align  with 
industry best practices and all changes to the documented procedures should be vetted through 
the associated parties for approval ensuring notification takes place as required;  

•  Routine and frequent training of shipboard officers and crew based on documented procedures 
for vessels transporting dangerous cargos should take place on a regular basis and cover such 
topics as; 

o  The safety risk of releasing LPG in open and enclosed spaces; 
o  Proper  methods  to  acknowledge  and  investigate  gas  detection  alarms  regardless of 

location; (Including making proper notifications to responsible parties) 

o  Ensuring  that  all  ventilation  systems  are  functioning  as  designed  with  no  conditions 

hindering its effectiveness such as open doors or obstructions; 

o  Methods  to  inspect  and  identify  leaks  throughout  the  cargo  system,  and  corrective 

actions to take when leaks are identified; 

o  Ways to manage and minimize the negative effects of hydrates throughout the entire 

o  Methods  to  reduce  static  electricity  as  found  in  the  National  Fire  Protection 

cargo system; 

Association (NFPA) 77. 

 

LPG  Carrier  owners  and  operators  are  encouraged  to  contact  the  Coast  Guard  regarding  hydrate 
management and other cargo issues. This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does 
not relieve any domestic or international safety, operational or material requirement.   Questions regarding 
this Safety Alert should be forwarded to the Coast Guard Office of Commercial Vessel Compliance, Foreign 
and  Offshore  Vessel  Division  (CG-CVC-2)  by  email  at  CGCVC@uscg.mil.    Port  and  Facility  questions 
regarding this Safety Alert should be forwarded to the Office of Port and Facility Compliance (CG-FAC) by 
email at CGFAC@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

