 

 
 
April 27, 2006                                                                                                                            Alert 2-06 
Washington, DC 
 
STAR PRINCESS Cruise Ship Fire 
 
The United Kingdom Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) and International Council of Cruise 
Lines (ICCL) have issued the attached safety notices to highlight specific fire safety issues as a result 
of the recent fire on the cruise ship STAR PRINCESS. 
 
MAIB recommends that all cruise lines take immediate action to comply with the ICCL safety notice, 
and  advises  the  United  Kingdom  Maritime  and  Coastguard  Agency  (MCA)    to  request  the 
International  Maritime  Organization  (IMO)  to  urgently  consider  appropriate  changes  to  the  SOLAS 
Convention  to  ensure  that  external  areas  of  cruise  vessels  meet  appropriate  standards  of  fire 
prevention  such  as  those  currently  applicable  to  internal  areas,  and  to  issue  appropriate  urgent 
guidance on fire protection measures for external areas. 
 
The U.S. Coast Guard agrees with the MAIB that the existing SOLAS regulations do not adequately 
address fire protection of external areas, including balcony areas, and will actively work with the UK 
and others to address this issue at the International Maritime Organization.   
 
ICCL  recommends  that  priority  be  given  to  replacing  any  combustible  balcony  partitions  with 
noncombustible  materials  as  soon  as  possible.    ICCL  also  urges  the  immediate  implementation  of 
operational safety measures to safeguard against possible fire risks on external balcony areas, and 
recommends fire risk assessments of external areas.   
 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  supports  the  actions  proposed  by  the  ICCL  and  MAIB  and 
recommends 
ICCL 
recommendations.   
 
Risk assessment tools and technical resources for risk-based decision making may be accessed on 
the Coast Guard's website at http://www.uscg.mil/hq/g-m/risk/e-guidelines/rbdm.htm .  
 
The U.S. Coast Guard believes that the fire risk assessments should: 

line  passenger  vessels  comply  with 

the  MAIB  and 

that  all  cruise 

identify apparent fire hazards;  

• 
•  assess the severity of potential fires that could occur involving the hazards;  
• 
• 

identify safeguards for reducing the risks associated with the hazards; and 
identify actions to reduce the risk such that should a fire occur, it will not spread and will 
be readily extinguished. 

 

Questions  or  comments  regarding  this  safety  alert  may  be  addressed  to  Mr. Randall  Eberly  of  the 
U.S.  Coast  Guard  Headquarters  Lifesaving  and  Fire  Safety  Standards  Division  at  202.267.1861 
or reberly@comdt.uscg.mil . This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not 
relieve any domestic or international, safety, operational or material requirement. 
 

 

MAIB SAFETY BULLETIN 1/2006

Fire on board the Bermuda registered cruise ship

Star Princess

on 23 March 2006

MAIB SAFETY BULLETIN 1/2006

This document, containing safety lessons, has been produced for marine safety purposes 
only, on the basis of information available to date.

The Merchant Shipping (Accident Reporting and Investigation) Regulations 2005 provide 
for the Chief Inspector of Marine Accidents to make recommendations at any time during 
the course of an investigation if, in his opinion, it is necessary or desirable to do so.

The Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) is carrying out an investigation into the 
ﬁre on board the Bermuda registered cruise ship Star Princess on 23 March 2006.  The 
MAIB will publish a full report on completion of the investigation.

Stephen Meyer 
Chief Inspector of Marine Accidents

 

This bulletin is also available on our website:  http://www.maib.gov.uk

Press Enquiries: 020 7944 3232/3387; out of hours: 020 7944 4292

Public Enquiries: 020 7944 3000

INTERNET ADDRESS FOR DFT PRESS NOTICES:

http://www.dft.gov.uk

BACKGROUND

At 0309 (UTC+5) on 23 March 2006, a ﬁre was detected on board the cruise ship Star 
Princess. The ship was on passage from Grand Cayman to Montego Bay, Jamaica, with 
2690 passengers and 1123 crew on board. The ﬁre is being investigated by the Marine 
Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) on behalf of the Bermuda Maritime Administration, in 
cooperation with the United States Coast Guard (USCG), and the United States’ National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). 

The cause of the ﬁre has yet to be determined. However, the seat of the ﬁre was on an 
external stateroom balcony sited on deck 10 on the vessel’s port side. The ﬁre spread 
rapidly along adjacent balconies, and within 10 minutes had spread up to decks 11 & 12 
and onto stateroom balconies in two adjacent ﬁre zones. It also spread internally as the 
heat of the ﬁre shattered the glass in stateroom balcony doors, but was contained by 
the ﬁxed ﬁre-smothering system ﬁtted in each of the staterooms. As the ﬁre progressed, 
large amounts of dense black smoke were generated from the combustible materials 
on the balconies, and the polycarbonate balcony partitions. This smoke entered the 
adjacent staterooms and alleyways, and hampered the evacuation of the passengers. One 
passenger died as a result of smoke inhalation, and 13 others were treated for the effects 
of the smoke.

The ﬁre was extinguished about 1.5 hours after it had started. The crew fought the ﬁre 
with water hoses from adjacent external areas, and from internal alleyways. Difﬁculty was 
experienced in reaching the ﬁre due to the construction and partitioning of the balcony 
areas. A total of 79 cabins were condemned after the ﬁre, and a further 204 were either 
water or smoke damaged. The damaged area covered 3 vertical ﬁre zones on 5 decks 
(Figures 1, 2 and 3).

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

ANALYSIS

Following  the  accident,  it  has  been  determined  by  practical  tests  that  the  materials  at  the 
seat of the ﬁre were readily ignitable, and that the polycarbonate balcony divisions generated 
intense heat and copious amounts of dense black smoke as they burned (Figure 4).

The International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) is an internationally agreed 
convention  governing  the  construction  and  safety  of  vessels  at  sea.  SOLAS  regulations, 
as  included  in  Chapter  II-2  Construction-Fire  protection,  ﬁre  detection  and  ﬁre  extinction, 
do not, currently, prescribe the combustibility of materials used on external balcony areas, 
as these are not included within the vessel’s ﬁre zones. Similarly, balcony areas on cruise 
ships are not required to have ﬁxed ﬁre detection or suppression systems, as would be the 
case in internal areas. Additionally, balcony areas are frequently difﬁcult to monitor due to 
their inaccessibility. This accident clearly demonstrates the risk of a serious ﬁre starting and 
quickly spreading in areas not covered by regulation.

The installation of balconies, similar to those on board Star Princess, has become increasingly 
common in modern passenger vessels. It is vital to ensure that the ﬁre protection arrangements 
within a ship, such as zoning, are not undermined by lack of appropriate measures externally. 
Immediate action is therefore required internationally, to address the risk of ﬁre in external 
areas such as balconies, and to stop the potentially catastrophic spread of any such ﬁre. 

Figure 4

ACTIONS TAKEN

The International Council of Cruise Lines (ICCL) has issued a safety notice (Annex A) to its 
members and other associations, identifying: 

a.  Immediate actions to mitigate the risk until the medium term measures have been 
     completed; and
b.  Additional actions to be undertaken within 3 months and 6 months, to provide longer 
     term solutions in existing ships.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The Maritime Administration of the United Kingdom is recommended to:

2006/162  Submit a formal request to the forthcoming eighty-ﬁrst session of the Maritime 

Safety Committee (MSC 81) of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to:

• 

• 

consider the issue comprehensively, with a view to urgently developing 
appropriate amendments to the 1974 SOLAS Convention, to address 
hazardous external areas of passenger ships, such as balconies, and 
ensure that they meet appropriate standards of ﬁre protection, such as 
those currently applicable to internal areas of passenger ships; 

in the interim, issue appropriate urgent guidance on ﬁre protection of 
external areas of passenger ships, such as balconies.

Cruise lines and operators/managers of passenger vessels are recommended to:

2006/163  Take urgent action to comply with the measures identiﬁed in the ICCL Safety 

Notice attached at Annex A.

Flag States are recommended to:

2006/164  Urgently review the ﬁre safety integrity of external areas of passenger ships on 
their Register, to ensure that the immediate and medium-term actions taken in 
the light of this Safety Bulletin are effective. 

 

 
 

   

 

 
 
April 13, 2006 

 

 

SAFETY NOTICE 

 
 
The purpose of this safety notice is to inform ICCL members and, to the extent 
feasible, other passenger vessel operators, of some of the preliminary indications 
from  the  recent  balcony  fire  on  the  cruise  ship  STAR  PRINCESS.  Additionally, 
this safety notice also urges immediate action.  
 
The investigation, being conducted by the UK’s Marine Accident Investigation 
Branch (MAIB) (at the request of the government of Bermuda, the flag state of 
STAR PRINCESS) also includes representatives of the United States Coast 
Guard (USCG), the United States National Transportation Safety Board (US 
NTSB).  The purpose of the investigation is to determine the cause of the fire. A 
full report from the MAIB will be available at a later date.  
 
Early indications are that the fire originated on an exterior balcony and quickly 
spread to other balconies in three main vertical fire zones.  The cause of the fire 
spread is unknown at this time, but the presence of combustible material in the 
balcony areas is considered to have been a major factor.   
 
This notice is to alert ship owners and ship managers of the potential fire risk on 
external areas, particularly balcony areas, arising from the use of combustible 
materials. Such areas typically lack smoke/heat detectors, and difficulty of 
access potentially makes fire fighting in these areas problematic.  These issues 
combine to raise the risk of high intensity fire spreading rapidly. 
 
In the interim, having met with the investigative authorities concerned, ICCL 
offers the following safety guidance to the cruise line industry: 
 
 
 
 
 

2111 Wilson Boulevard  ●  8th Floor ●  Arlington, Virginia 22201 (USA) 

TEL  (703) 522-8463 ● FAX  (703) 533-3811 ● WEB  www.iccl.org 

Annex A 
 
Immediate Action 
 
1.  Immediately implement measures to counter the risk of this type of marine 

casualty such as:  

a.  Increase vigilance on all vessels with balconies where there may be a 

presence of combustible materials and the lack of detectors or 
sprinkler systems. In this respect, the provision of dedicated lookouts 
and additional fire patrols should be considered. 

b.  Review the crew’s onboard training and response procedures to 

ensure that the ship’s firefighting teams are prepared to respond to a 
fire occurring in the balcony area. 

c.  Advise passengers and crew not to leave towels and personal 

belongings on balconies when they are not in their rooms. 

d.  Instruct housekeeping staff to place personal articles left on balconies 
by room occupants back in the room during their last visit of the day to 
the guest room, and to observe balconies during other visits to the 
room. 

e.  Re-emphasize fire safety in communications to passengers, including 

the distribution of appropriate informational pamphlets. 

f.  Re-emphasize to passengers the need not to throw any items over a 

ship’s side from balconies or other external areas... 

g.  Re-emphasize to passengers the hazards of not properly extinguishing 

smoking materials where smoking is authorized, and never to leave 
smoking materials unattended. 

h.  Re-emphasize to crew and passengers the hazards of using 

unauthorized heating elements such as electrical heating coils used in 
cups or mugs and open flames such as candles. 

 

Additional Actions 
 
2.  Within three months, determine the areas at risk by carrying out a fire risk 

assessment of external areas, particularly balcony areas. During this 
assessment the following shall be taken into account:  

•  Accessibility for fire fighting 
•  Availability of fixed detection and fire fighting systems 
•  Structural materials (particularly balcony partitions) 
•  Chairs, tables and other furniture including any cushions or coverings 
•  Paints 
•  Deck or floor mats 
•  Deck coverings 
•  Handrails 
•  Other combustible materials typically present, if any. 
 

3.  In accordance with the results of the fire risk assessment, and in consultation 

with regulatory authorities replace all inappropriate materials on balcony 
areas with materials that are determined to be acceptable.  Replace all 

combustible balcony dividers on a priority basis and as soon as possible with 
dividers that are of non-combustible material. 

 
4.   A plan to make any replacements of materials should be developed as a final 
step of the fire risk assessment, with the aim of completing this action within 
six months from the issue of this safety notice.  

 
ICCL will follow-up with member lines regarding their progress. 
 
ICCL and member lines will continue to work closely with the investigating 
authorities to review lessons learned from this incident and to take additional 
actions as appropriate.  
 

