 
 
 
 
April 28, 2010                                                                                                                Alert 04-10 
Washington, DC                                 

Watertight Doors – Close Them and Dog Them! 

flooded 

the  engine  room 

 
Recently  a  push  boat  operating  “unfaced”  (no 
barges  attached)  in  the  Houston  Ship  Channel 
flooded  and  sank  while  in  the  wake  of  tractor 
tug resulting in the death of the push boat crew 
and the narrow escape of two others.  Although 
the  investigation  is  not  yet  compete,  it  appears 
that  the  following  occurred:    The  vessel’s 
watertight doors leading to its engine room had 
each  been  pinned  open.    The  push  boat  had 
very  little  freeboard  and  was  fully  loaded  with 
fuel  and  water.    As  it  took  the  wake  of  the 
tractor  tug,  the  vessel  listed  to  one  side  and 
down 
through  a 
watertight  door.  As  it  rolled  to  the  other  side,  it 
took on more water, eventually sinking stern first 
and  coming  to  rest  on  the  bottom  of  the  channel  in  an  upright  position.    A  person  working  in  the 
engine room was trapped by the incoming water and drowned. Two others narrowly escaped death 
after being trapped in a berthing area for over 10 minutes, breathing only a pocket of air before taking 
dramatic efforts to reach the surface via a broken window. 
 
Watertight  doors  have  been  the  subject  of  three  other  safety  alerts  involving  fishing  vessels  and 
offshore  supply  vessels.    Despite  these  awareness  efforts,  despite  certain  vessels  having  stability 
requirements requiring closure of such doors well documented in stability letters, despite owners and 
operators  knowing  what  constitutes  “Good  Marine  Practice,”  and  many  other  applicable  regulations 
the  Coast  Guard  continues  to  investigate  casualties  where  the  failure  to  keep  closed  or  properly 
maintain  watertight doors is determined to be  a causal factor. 
 
Watertight doors function to establish the watertight integrity of the vessel and must always be treated 
as such.  Although an open or poorly maintained door may seem like an insignificant issue, when the 
right causal factors align, the door can become a death trap and result in terrible circumstances to a 
vessel  and  its  crew.    The  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  to  all  operators  of  any  vessel, 
underway, having watertight doors to:    
 

Not Actual Vessel  

CLOSE THEM and DOG THEM! 

The Coast Guard also recommends that the attached related safety alerts be reviewed for additional 
information.  This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any 
domestic  or  international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  Questions 
can be addressed to Mr. Ken Olsen at 202.372.1037 or via the email address below. 

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

******* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 19, 2008  
Washington, DC    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alert  12-08 

WATERTIGHT DOORS 

This  Safety  Alert  addresses  the  importance  of  properly  maintaining  and  closing  watertight  doors.  
Unfortunately, marine casualties, often resulting in loss of life and property, continue to be linked to 
improperly maintained or closed watertight doors! 

One  of  the  contributory  factors  in  a  recent  major  marine  casualty  on  an  uninspected  commercial 
fishing vessel was the failure to properly maintain and keep closed watertight doors on the vessel’s 
weather  deck.    In  this  incident  one  watertight  door  was  not  properly  dogged  down,  permitting  it  to 
open and let water flood a space below the main deck.  Another watertight door on the vessel’s main 
deck was not maintained and as a result, it leaked, permitting water to enter an adjacent space.  

Over 42% of all marine casualties on fishing vessels involve flooding that in most cases could have 
been  prevented  or  minimized  by  the  proper  use  of  watertight  doors.    Two  safety  alerts  have  been 
issued in the past two years emphasizing the importance of maintaining watertight doors and keeping 
them closed at all times while underway except when actually being used.  

As  a  result  of  this  incident  and  due  to  other  related  casualties,  the  U.  S.  Coast  Guard  strongly 
recommends vessel owners and operators to:  

Regularly inspect the condition of all watertight doors on their vessels including the gasket and knife-
edge to ensure that the doors close properly when dogged down securely.  Watertight door gaskets 
should  not  be  painted;  any  paint  discovered  on  the  gasket  should  be  removed.    Excessive  gaps 
between the gasket ends should be avoided and repaired upon discovery; 

Periodically  perform  either  a  chalk  or  light  test  on  all  watertight  doors  to  ensure  that  the  knife  edge 
makes contact with the entire door gasket;  

Ensure  that  all  dogs  or  closing  assemblies  move  freely  and  close  securely.    Routinely  lubricate  all 
watertight door fittings and hinges to ensure fluid operation; and 
 
Ensure that vessel masters provide regular training on watertight door operation and maintenance to 
their crews.  Watertight doors should be closed at all times while a vessel is underway except when 
transiting from space to space. 
 
Please  access  http://marineinvestigations.us    Safety  Alerts  >  General  Operations  >  "Securing 
Watertight Doors" and "Maintaining Vessel Watertight Integrity" for additional related information. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us  
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil  

 

 
 
 
 
 
May 9, 2008                                                                                                                              Alert 1-08 
Washington, DC   
 

Maintaining Vessel Watertight Integrity 

 
This Safety Alert addresses two issues: watertight integrity and high level bilge alarms.  
 
Recently a marine casualty involving a fishing vessel in the Bering Sea resulted in multiple fatalities 
and complete loss of the vessel.  A Marine Board of Investigation is currently examining the various 
circumstances  surrounding  the  casualty.    Although  the  investigation  is  not  complete,  testimony 
indicates  the  flooding  of  the  vessel  may  have  been  exacerbated  due  to  open  or  leaking  watertight 
doors and other compartmental deficiencies which impacted the vessel’s overall watertight integrity.    
 
As a result of this and other similar casualties, the U. S. Coast Guard strongly recommends vessel 
owners and operators: 
 
WATERTIGHT INTEGRITY 
 
Ensure  all  watertight  decks  and  bulkheads  are  inspected  periodically  to  verify  that  there  are  no 
unprotected  openings  or  improper  penetrations  that  will  allow  progressive  flooding  and  that  closure 
devices (e.g. watertight doors, duct closures, etc.) are in place and in working order.  
 
Ensure all crewmembers are familiar with the locations of the watertight doors (WTDs) and weather 
tight  closures  throughout  their  vessels.  Knowing  the  locations  of  such  WTDs  and  weather  tight 
closures should be part of the crewmember vessel familiarization process.    
 
Ensure  WTDs  and  hatches  are  closed  while  at  sea  and  as  otherwise  specified  in  the  stability 
guidance  provided  to  the  master  or  individual  in  charge.    The  importance  of  keeping  WTDs  and 
hatches  closed  should  be  emphasized  on  a  regular  basis  (e.g.  at  safety  meetings).    WTDs  and 
hatches  should  be  opened  only  briefly  to  allow  passage  and  labeled  appropriately  to  remind 
crewmembers to close them.  If they must remain open to permit work, WTDs and hatches should be 
attended at all times so that they can immediately be closed.  Any WTDs permitted to be open while 
the vessel is underway should be secured during drills to ensure they work properly. 
 
Implement  a  WTD  inspection  program  to  ensure  each  WTD  is  regularly  inspected  and  properly 
maintained.  As part of the inspection of each WTD, the following should be examined: straightness of 
the  knife  edge;  the  door  assembly  for  twisting  or  warp-age;  evidence  of  loose,  missing  seized  or 
damaged components; permanent set in gasket material, cracks in the gasket; gaps at gasket joints; 
paint, rust, or other foreign material on gaskets, knife-edges and working parts; binding and difficult 
operations;  and  loose  or  excessively  tight  dogs.  Rotating  spindles  of  the  dog,  handles  and  hinges, 
and other points of friction should be lubricated to prevent seizing and allow proper closure. If fitted, 
the spindle packing should also be examined.  
 

Page 1 of 2 

 

Ensure watertight hatches, dogged manholes, bolted manhole covers, and access plates are given 
similar examinations, focusing on the sealing surfaces and the method by which the hatch is secured.  
Gasket materials should be replaced whenever they are found insufficient.  Regardless of the type of 
hatch or access, every component that secures the device, such as dogs, wing nuts, or bolts should 
be  inspected,  lubricated  and  free,  and  repaired  or  replaced  as  necessary  to  ensure  they  operate 
properly.  As with watertight doors, hatches and accesses should be labeled to indicate they remain 
closed  while  underway.    Most  importantly,  all  securing  devices  must  be  used  when  the  hatch  or 
access is closed.  Improper closure of a hatch will not prevent flooding. 
 
Ensure compartments and external hull structures fitted with ventilation ducts that have hinged covers 
with gaskets, hinges, sealing surfaces and securing mechanisms are regularly inspected and properly 
maintained (see above for guidance).   
 
Ensure  electrical  cables  and  conduits,  piping  runs,  remote  valve  actuators,  and  other  components 
that penetrate watertight bulkheads, decks, and compartments are inspected frequently and properly 
maintained.    Each  may  have  a  unique  sealing  method  involving  glands  with  packing  assemblies, 
penetration seals, or other methods.  Frequent inspection and proper maintenance of these various 
fittings and assemblies will assist in minimizing the possibility of progressive flooding. 
 
BILGE AND HIGH WATER ALARMS 
 
Ensure water accumulation is minimized and all spaces are kept dry unless permitted by the stability 
instructions provided to the master or individual in charge.   
 
Ensure  bilge  high  level  alarms  are  arranged  to  provide  the  earliest  warnings  of  abnormal 
accumulation.  The high level bilge alarms should be set as low as possible to the deck or bilge well 
and positioned along the centermost area of the compartment or in a location at which the fluids will 
gravitate to first.  In areas where bilge water routinely accumulates, the bilge high level alarms should 
be  placed  just  above  the  point  where  under  normal  working  conditions  the  accumulation  would  be 
pumped to a holding tank, overboard, or through an oily water separation system if required.  Alarms 
may be fitted with short time delays to prevent nuisance alarms caused by the rolling and pitching of 
the vessel.   
 
Ensure all crewmembers understand the importance of minimizing water in the bilges. 
 
Provide  the  funding,  labor,  spare  parts,  and  vessel  availability  necessary  to  ensure  leakages 
stemming  from  machinery,  equipment  and  other  components  are  kept  to  a  minimum  at  all  times  in 
accordance with good marine practice.   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  

 

******* 

 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis – http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe – Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 
 
 

 

September 19, 2007   
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

               Alert 3-07 

SECURING OF WATERTIGHT DOORS WHILE UNDERWAY 

 
This safety alert reiterates the need for vessel operators to ensure that watertight doors are always 
closed  while  underway,  except  when  being  used  for  access.    This  alert  is  the  direct  result  of  a 
collision between a 534’ cargo ship and a 166’ offshore supply vessel.  The incident occurred on the 
Mississippi  River,  in  a  restricted  visibility  situation.    As  a  result  of  the  collision,  the  offshore  supply 
vessel capsized and sank – the crew of five was lost. 
 
During the ensuing investigation of this incident, evidence was uncovered that indicated the offshore 
supply  vessel  was  operating  with  its  watertight  doors  in  the  open  position.    This  is  a  violation  of  46 
CFR  174.210(e),  which  states  that  the  master  must  ensure  that  a  watertight  door  is  always  closed, 
except when being used for access.  Watertight doors are a critical part of a vessel’s subdivision, and 
consequently  a  critical  part  of  damage  stability  considerations,  so  the  importance  of  keeping  these 
closed is very obvious.  This becomes even more critical on smaller ships, which may only have one 
or two watertight doors to prevent flooding the entire length of the ship. 
 
Please, keep these doors closed! 
 
The  Office  of  Design  and  Engineering  Standards,  Naval  Architecture  Division  (CG-3PSE-2) 
developed  this  alert.    Questions  pertaining  to  this  safety  alert  may  be  addressed  to  LCDR  Tracy 
Phillips at (202) 372-1373 or Tracy.Phillips@uscg.mil. 
 
This material is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any existing domestic 
or international safety, operational or material requirement. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

