  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 1997 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

THERMAL PROTECTiVE AIDS 

      Safety Alert 01-97 
 

In  January  of  1995  a  106  foot  commercial  crabbing  vessel  abruptly  capsized  and  sank  in  the  Bering  Sea 
with  the  loss  of  all  six  crew  members  on  board.  Weather  conditions  at  the  time  were  severe;  an  air 
temperature  of  28  degrees  F,  40  knot  winds,  a  wind  chill  of  -15  degrees  F,  sea  water  temperature  of  38 
degrees  F,  and  15-foot  swells  with  3-foot  seas.  Approximately  three  and  a  half  hours  after  a  cryptic 
MAYDAY  call  was  heard  responding  fishing  vessel  in  the  area  recovered  two  liferafts.  One  of  the  rafts 
contained  two  unconscious,  lightly  dressed  crewmen  from  the  stricken  vessel.  All  attempts  to  revive  the 
victims were futile and the autopsies revealed they died of hypothermia.  

The crew on the rescue vessel noted that the liferafts contained loose emergency equipment including the 
Thermal  Protective  Aids  (TPAs).  TPAs  are  plastic  garments  that  a  person  can  wear  in  order  to  slow  the 
effects of hypothermia. Although not as effective as an immersion suit, it's compact enough to store in a life 
raft and, if donned, can cut down a person's heat loss from radiation, convection and, to a lesser degree, 
conduction. All SOLAS liferafts are required to carry enough TPAs for 10% of the rated crew capacity of the 
liferaft, or at least two per liferaft. Federally documented commercial fishing industry vessels that operate in 
cold  waters  beyond  20  miles  from  the  shore  or  all  Federally  documented  commercial  fishing  industry 
vessels that operate beyond 50 miles from shore are required to carry SOLAS life rafts.  

The investigation into this accident revealed that the TPA's in the recovered liferafts had not been removed 
from  their  packages.  More  significantly,  most  of  the  fishermen  interviewed  in  this  case  were  unaware  of 
what a TPA was and the fact that they're standard equipment on all SOLAS liferafts! 

It  was  miraculous  that  the  fishermen  in  this  case  made  it  into  a  life  raft  at  all  due  to  the  apparent  hasty 
vessel  abandonment  as  was  indicated  by  the  brief  MAYDAY  call  and  the  victim's  light  clothing.  Had  they 
been able to don the TPAs they may have had a better chance to survive.  

MARINERS PLEASE NOTE: 

1.  TPAs  can  save  lives  and  are  standard  equipment  found  in  SOLAS  liferafts  which  are  required  for 
documented commercial fishing vessels operating more than 50 miles offshore or more that 20 miles 
offshore in cold water.  

2.  Coast Guard-approved training in survival and vessel abandonment now emphasizes the existence, 

benefits, and use of all emergency equipment, especially TPAs, stowed in liferafts.  

3.  Examining  a  liferaft's  survival  kit  is  a  great  training  opportunity  for  all.  Familiarization  with  these 
contents in the light of day, under good conditions, will make survival kit contents easier to find and 
use in emergencies; especially in severe conditions!  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

