  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 23, 2003 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 02-03 
 

JOINT MMS / USCG SAFETY ALERT  

 

 
The U.S. Coast Guard, in conjunction with the Minerals Management Service (MMS), completed a review of 
accidents on fixed offshore facilities that have resulted in fatalities or serious injuries. It was observed that a 
number of incidents occurred during operations in which grating or other deck covering had been 
temporarily removed. Cases involved personnel who were working at temporary deck openings and who 
became entangled in equipment, tripped, or simply forgot that the opening was there. Other events involved 
personnel who were not aware of the temporary deck opening and who were passing through the work area 
when the accident occurred.  

Coast Guard regulations require that openings in decks that are not in use be covered, guarded, or 
otherwise made inaccessible. Further, in cases where there is a hazard of falling ten or more feet when 
engaged in an activity such as during and after removal of decking, personnel are required to wear secured 
safety belts. MMS regulations require that lease operations do not result in injury or loss of life and that 
operators perform work in a safe and workmanlike manner.  

In order to reduce fall hazards associated with temporary deck openings, employees shall wear secured 
safety belts when;  

removing grating or other deck covering to create a temporary deck opening,  

• 
•  working within the perimeter of the guard rails, or  
•  near the temporary opening when a portion of a temporary guard rail is removed. 

Employees may work outside an opening without safety belts if temporary guard rails are installed that 
completely encompass, and are in close proximity to, the deck opening. These temporary guard rails should 
be of a contrasting color to the immediate environment and should be substantially constructed to prevent 
an accidental fall through the opening by an employee. Routine safety meetings and notices regarding work 
hazards should continue to highlight the dangers associated with temporary deck openings. The following 
regulations relate to the aforementioned issues:  

•  33 CFR 142.42  
•  33 CFR 142.87  
•  30 CFR 250.106  
•  30 CFR 250.107(a)  

For additional information contact Mr. David M. Moore of the MMS at 703.787.1637 or LCDR Eric Walters of 
the USCG at ewalters@comdt.uscg.mil or 202.267.0499.  

VISIT HTTP://WWW.MMS.GOV/SAFETYALERTS/ FOR ADDITIONAL SAFETY ALERTS RELATED TO OCS OIL AND GAS 
ACTIVITIES.  
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

 

 

2 

