 
 
 
 
 
 
July  22,  2013             
Washington, DC                                     Parasailing Operations 

       

     

     

     

     

   

   

Know Your ROPES 

 

        Assistant Commandant for Prevention Policy 

       

     

     

    Alert  07-13 

A series of parasail incidents resulting in fatalities and injuries have occurred over the last few years.  
Since  2006,  there  have  been  11  deaths  and  52  injuries  as  a  result  of  parasailing  activities.    There 
have  been  several  common  factors  in  all  of  these  incidents  that  are  unique  to  parasailing.  The 
following  mnemonic  ‘Know  Your  ROPES’  was  designed  to  remind  parasail  operators  of  important 
safety issues that may help prevent future casualties: 
Remember that most parasail fatalities and injuries are related to the failure of the towline.  Failures 
have occurred at tensions significantly below the rated towline strengths due to a variety of reasons 
that may include cyclic loading, long term exposure to environmental elements, the presence of knots 
creating a weak point, and overloading. 
Observe  and  monitor  weather  conditions  continuously.  Increases  in  wind  speed  impacts  the 
relative speed against the chute, where limits of the towline and/or chute can quickly be exceeded. As 
wind  speed  doubles,  the  load  on  the  towline  may  quadruple.    Be  vigilant  in  monitoring  weather 
conditions noting the formation of squalls, thunderstorms, or whenever weather fronts are expected to 
pass  through  your  operational  area.    Cease  operations  well  before  such  weather  conditions  impact 
your  parasailing  operation.    ASTM  Standard  F2993-13  published  on  April  1,  2013  is  a  ‘Standard 
Guide  for  Monitoring  Weather  Conditions  for  Safe  Parasail  Operation’.    It  is  available  for  purchase 
and download on line at http://www.astm.org/. 
Prepare for emergencies by having  well  documented procedures and conducting crew training to 
ensure  proficiency  in  responding  to  emergencies  such  as  towline  breaks,  winch  failures,  propulsion 
failures, and any other concerns that impact crew/passenger safety.   
Ensure  that  all  of  your  equipment  is  properly  maintained  on  a  continual  basis.    This  includes  the 
winch and drive motor, hydraulic brakes, hoses and piping, spooling systems, and other tackle.  Also 
check  your  chutes,  harnesses,  and  related  components  for  stitching  failures,  degradation,  and  the 
need for general repairs. Immediately correct identified problems. 
Safety is up to you the Operator.  Coast Guard Credentialed Operators are expected to provide an 
adequate level of safety during vessel operations, to include the monitoring of weather conditions and 
maintenance of equipment. 
 
 
The  Coast  Guard  encourages  owners  and  operators  to  work  with  each  other  and  related  industry 
associations  to  share  best  practices  and  develop  operational  standards  to  maximize  safety  and 
prevent marine casualties.  Enforcement action may be taken against the operator for misconduct or 
negligent operation. 
 
This  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  USCG 
Headquarters, Washington, DC. 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  Http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:  Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

Know Your ROPES 

Your towline! Most accidents are related to the failure of 
the tow line.  Remember to continuously assess your line. 

Weather!  Increased winds and other weather conditions 
can significantly impact your operations.  Cease operations 
well in advance! See ASTM ‘Weather’ Standard F2993-13. 

Be ready for any emergency. Have well documented proce-
dures and conduct crew training frequently. 

Ensure your equipment is properly maintained. Immedi-
ately correct any problems. 

Safety is up to you...the Operator!  Do everything you can 
to ensure the safety of your passengers. 

