 

 
 
 
 
 
May 9, 2008                                                                                                                              Alert 1-08 
Washington, DC   
 

Maintaining Vessel Watertight Integrity 

 
This Safety Alert addresses two issues: watertight integrity and high level bilge alarms.  
 
Recently a marine casualty involving a fishing vessel in the Bering Sea resulted in multiple fatalities 
and complete loss of the vessel.  A Marine Board of Investigation is currently examining the various 
circumstances  surrounding  the  casualty.    Although  the  investigation  is  not  complete,  testimony 
indicates  the  flooding  of  the  vessel  may  have  been  exacerbated  due  to  open  or  leaking  watertight 
doors and other compartmental deficiencies which impacted the vessel’s overall watertight integrity.    
 
As a result of this and other similar casualties, the U. S. Coast Guard strongly recommends vessel 
owners and operators: 
 
WATERTIGHT INTEGRITY 
 
Ensure  all  watertight  decks  and  bulkheads  are  inspected  periodically  to  verify  that  there  are  no 
unprotected  openings  or  improper  penetrations  that  will  allow  progressive  flooding  and  that  closure 
devices (e.g. watertight doors, duct closures, etc.) are in place and in working order.  
 
Ensure all crewmembers are familiar with the locations of the watertight doors (WTDs) and weather 
tight  closures  throughout  their  vessels.  Knowing  the  locations  of  such  WTDs  and  weather  tight 
closures should be part of the crewmember vessel familiarization process.    
 
Ensure  WTDs  and  hatches  are  closed  while  at  sea  and  as  otherwise  specified  in  the  stability 
guidance  provided  to  the  master  or  individual  in  charge.    The  importance  of  keeping  WTDs  and 
hatches  closed  should  be  emphasized  on  a  regular  basis  (e.g.  at  safety  meetings).    WTDs  and 
hatches  should  be  opened  only  briefly  to  allow  passage  and  labeled  appropriately  to  remind 
crewmembers to close them.  If they must remain open to permit work, WTDs and hatches should be 
attended at all times so that they can immediately be closed.  Any WTDs permitted to be open while 
the vessel is underway should be secured during drills to ensure they work properly. 
 
Implement  a  WTD  inspection  program  to  ensure  each  WTD  is  regularly  inspected  and  properly 
maintained.  As part of the inspection of each WTD, the following should be examined: straightness of 
the  knife  edge;  the  door  assembly  for  twisting  or  warp-age;  evidence  of  loose,  missing  seized  or 
damaged components; permanent set in gasket material, cracks in the gasket; gaps at gasket joints; 
paint, rust, or other foreign material on gaskets, knife-edges and working parts; binding and difficult 
operations;  and  loose  or  excessively  tight  dogs.  Rotating  spindles  of  the  dog,  handles  and  hinges, 
and other points of friction should be lubricated to prevent seizing and allow proper closure. If fitted, 
the spindle packing should also be examined.  
 

Page 1 of 2 

 

Ensure watertight hatches, dogged manholes, bolted manhole covers, and access plates are given 
similar examinations, focusing on the sealing surfaces and the method by which the hatch is secured.  
Gasket materials should be replaced whenever they are found insufficient.  Regardless of the type of 
hatch or access, every component that secures the device, such as dogs, wing nuts, or bolts should 
be  inspected,  lubricated  and  free,  and  repaired  or  replaced  as  necessary  to  ensure  they  operate 
properly.  As with watertight doors, hatches and accesses should be labeled to indicate they remain 
closed  while  underway.    Most  importantly,  all  securing  devices  must  be  used  when  the  hatch  or 
access is closed.  Improper closure of a hatch will not prevent flooding. 
 
Ensure compartments and external hull structures fitted with ventilation ducts that have hinged covers 
with gaskets, hinges, sealing surfaces and securing mechanisms are regularly inspected and properly 
maintained (see above for guidance).   
 
Ensure  electrical  cables  and  conduits,  piping  runs,  remote  valve  actuators,  and  other  components 
that penetrate watertight bulkheads, decks, and compartments are inspected frequently and properly 
maintained.    Each  may  have  a  unique  sealing  method  involving  glands  with  packing  assemblies, 
penetration seals, or other methods.  Frequent inspection and proper maintenance of these various 
fittings and assemblies will assist in minimizing the possibility of progressive flooding. 
 
BILGE AND HIGH WATER ALARMS 
 
Ensure water accumulation is minimized and all spaces are kept dry unless permitted by the stability 
instructions provided to the master or individual in charge.   
 
Ensure  bilge  high  level  alarms  are  arranged  to  provide  the  earliest  warnings  of  abnormal 
accumulation.  The high level bilge alarms should be set as low as possible to the deck or bilge well 
and positioned along the centermost area of the compartment or in a location at which the fluids will 
gravitate to first.  In areas where bilge water routinely accumulates, the bilge high level alarms should 
be  placed  just  above  the  point  where  under  normal  working  conditions  the  accumulation  would  be 
pumped to a holding tank, overboard, or through an oily water separation system if required.  Alarms 
may be fitted with short time delays to prevent nuisance alarms caused by the rolling and pitching of 
the vessel.   
 
Ensure all crewmembers understand the importance of minimizing water in the bilges. 
 
Provide  the  funding,  labor,  spare  parts,  and  vessel  availability  necessary  to  ensure  leakages 
stemming  from  machinery,  equipment  and  other  components  are  kept  to  a  minimum  at  all  times  in 
accordance with good marine practice.   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  

 

******* 

 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis – http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe – Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

Page 2 of 2 

