  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 16, 1998 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

REDUCING THE RISK OF FALLS OVERBOARD 

      Safety Alert 03-98 
 

The  test  of  any  gambler  is  the  size  of  the  stake  he'll  place  on  what  he  feels  is  a  sure  thing.  Perhaps  the 
average  sailor  is  overly  optimistic  about  the  odds  because  he  too  often  sees  those  who've  gambled  and 
won  while  the  Coast  Guard  statistics  reflect  those  who've  gambled  and  lost.  The  large  percentage  of 
persons  lost  each  year  from  falling  overboard  from  all  classes  of  vessels  and  boats  indicates  that  sailors 
and boatmen fare poorly as gamblers, especially those who are working without a personal flotation device 
where  the  risk  of  falling  overboard  is  high.  Daily,  summaries  and  news  accounts  tell  of  rescue  efforts 
performed  by  the  Coast  Guard,  local  police,  and  rescue  squads  which  attempted  to  locate  persons  who 
were lost overboard from tugs, barges, pleasure craft, docks, and large commercial vessels.  

•  What are your chances of survival if you fall overboard without being seen?  
• 
• 
• 

If you are injured or dazed before you fall overboard?  
If the water temperature is extreme?  
If the time for the rescue forces to reach you takes over a few minutes?  

No matter how high the risks under normal conditions, they are surely a great deal higher when you are not 
wearing  a  personal  flotation  device!  We  all,  at  times,  have  to  take  a  chance  on  a  long  shot,  but  we  don’t 
have to bet our lives on it.  

A case in point involved the death of a seaman who fell overboard at sea while rigging an accommodation 
ladder. As the ship was preparing to enter port, the seaman was detailed to release the toggle pins which 
held the ladder in a horizontal position along-side the vessel. As he bent over, the ship rolled, tossing him 
into the water. Investigation revealed that the man was not wearing a life preserver or work vest, nor did he 
have any safety lines rigged.  

Subsequent  to  the  tragedy,  the  steamship  company  implemented  a  number  of  operating  procedures 
designed to prevent a similar casualty. Seamen are now required to wear a life preserver or work vest and 
to  use  a  safety  harness  and  line  when  working  over  the  side.  In  addition,  a  deck  officer  supervises  the 
operation  and  the  master  is  authorized  to  slow  the  ship  and  seek  a  lee  while  this  evolution  takes 
place.Professional  mariners  realize  that  rigging  an  accommodation  ladder  is  one  of  the  more  hazardous 
procedures a seaman must routinely face. Virtually all ships are required to rig an accommodation ladder 
every time they approach a port. To reduce the hazards for your shipmates, answer the following questions:  

•  Are seamen on my ships required to periodically work over the side?  
•  Are procedures followed which insure their safety when they do work over the side?  
•  Are Coast Guard approved work vests stowed in an accessible location?  
•  Are the work vests in good condition?  
•  Are my masters reluctant to slow down when men are working over the side?  

If these questions are answered in the interests of personnel safety, the lessons from this casualty will be 
put  to  good  use.  This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any 
domestic  or  international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil 

1 

