 
 
 
 
 
 
September 17, 2009                                                                                                               Alert 06-09 
Washington, DC 

 
 

 

 

PARASAILING INCIDENTS 

Recently,  two  parasail  vessel  passengers  lost  their  lives  when  the  towline  to  which  their  parachute 
and  harness  were  attached  parted,  causing  the  passengers  and  the  parachute  to  descend.  
Subsequently,  the  two  passengers  were  dragged  along  the  water's  surface  by  the  parachute  and 
ultimately  were  ensnared  by  the  pilings  and  the  structure  of  an  ocean  fishing  pier.    Although  an 
investigation  is  underway  and  the  causal  factors  surrounding  this  accident  are  being  discovered,  it 
appears that high winds and waves may have contributed to this casualty. 
 
The Coast Guard strongly reminds the parasailing industry, its vessel owners, operators and shore 
side  personnel  to  be  vigilant  in  their  observations  of  current  and  forecasted  weather  and  sea 
conditions with particular attention paid to wind speed.   Approaching weather patterns or squall lines 
present significant hazards to these operations due to sudden and dramatic shifts in wind direction, 
gusty  winds,  or  even  lightning.    In  a  matter  of  a  few  short  moments  what  is  intended  to  be  a 
pleasurable experience can become life threatening.    
 
The  Professional  Association  of  Parasail  Operators  (PAPO)  has  developed  and  published  parasail 
vessel  Operating  Standards  and  Guidelines  for  the  safe  parasail  operations.    These  standards  are 
available to PAPO members and the parasail industry.  They can be obtained online at:   
 

http://www.teampapo.org/documents/2006PAPOOSAG_000.pdf 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    This  document  does  not  represent  an 
official endorsement of PAPO.  Developed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis, United States 
Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  Questions can be addressed to Mr. Ken Olsen at the 
email address below or 202.372.1037. 
 
                                                                        ******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

