 
 
 
 
 
 
October 30, 2008                                                                                                                  Alert 10-08 
Washington, DC  

NEW AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM (AIS) DEVICES 
MAY NOT BE DISCERNIBLE WITH OLDER AIS SOFTWARE 

 

The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  is  pleased  to  announce  the  availability  of  type-approved  Automatic 
Identification System (AIS) Class B devices. These lower cost AIS devices are interoperable with AIS 
Class  A  devices  and  make  use  of  expanded  AIS  messaging  capabilities.  Unfortunately,  not  all 
existing  Class  A  devices  are  able  to  take  full  advantage  of  these  new  messaging  capabilities.  All 
existing AIS stations will be able to receive and process these new messages from a Class B device. 
However,  they  may  not  be  able  to  display  all  Class  B  information  on  their  Minimum  Keyboard  & 
Display (MKD) or other onboard navigation systems. In most cases, a software update or patch will 
be  required  to  do  so.  Therefore,  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  cautions  new  AIS  Class  B  users  to  not 
assume that they are being ‘seen’ by all other AIS users or that all their information is available to 
all  AIS  users.  Further,  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  all  users  of  out-dated 
AIS software update their systems as soon as practicable.   

The  new  Class  B  devices  have  the  same  ability  to  acquire  and  display  targets  not  visible  to  radar 
(around  the  bend,  in  sea  clutter,  or  during  foul  weather).  They  differ  slightly  in  their  features  and 
nature of design, which reduces their cost and affects their performance. They report at a fixed rate 
(30  seconds)  vice  the  Class  A’s  variable  rate  (between  2-10  seconds  dependent  on  speed  and 
course  change).  They  consume  less  power,  thus  broadcast  at  lower  strength  (2  watts  versus  12 
watts), which impacts their broadcast range; but, they broadcast and receive virtually the same vessel 
identification and other information as Class A devices, however, do so via different AIS messages.   

Class  A  devices  by  design  will  receive  the  newer  Class  B  AIS  messages  and  their  MKDs  should 
display a Class B vessel’s dynamic data (i.e. MMSI, position, course and speed), unfortunately, there 
are  a  few  older  models  that  do  not.  Although  these  older  devices  might  not  display  the  new  AIS 
messages, they are designed—and tested—to receive and process these messages and make them 
available to external devices (e.g. electronic chart systems, chart plotters, radar) via a Class A output 
port. These external devices may also require updating in order to discern Class B equipped vessels. 

AIS automatically broadcasts dynamic, static, and voyage-related vessel information that is received 
by  other  AIS-equipped  stations.  In  ship-to-ship  mode,  AIS  provides  essential  information  that  is  not 
otherwise readily available to other vessels, such as name, position, course, and speed. In the ship-
to-shore mode, AIS allows for the efficient exchange of information that previously was only available 
via  voice  communications  with  Vessel  Traffic  Services.  In  either  mode,  AIS  enhances  a  user’s 
situational  awareness,  makes  possible  the  accurate  exchange  of  navigational  information,  mitigates 
the risk of collision through reliable passing arrangements, facilitates vessel traffic management while 
simultaneously  reducing  voice  radiotelephone  transmissions,  and  enhances  maritime  domain 
awareness. The U.S. Coast Guard encourages its widest use. 

 

The U.S. Coast Guard advises mandated AIS users that Class B devices do not meet current 
AIS  carriage  requirements—either  the  International  Convention  for  the  Safety  of  Life  at  Sea 
(SOLAS  V/19.2.4)  or  U.S.  regulations  (33  CFR  164.46).  The  Coast  Guard  is  in  the  process  of 
expanding the current carriage requirements to include most self-propelled commercial vessels which 
navigate  U.S.  waters,  and  the  use  of  Class  B  devices  will  be  permissible  on  some  of  these 
commercial  vessels.  Prospective  buyers,  particularly  those  operating    commercial  vessels  that  are 
highly  maneuverable,  travel  at  high  speed,  or  routinely  transit  congested  waters  or  in  close-quarter 
situations  with  other  AIS  equipped  vessels  should  consider,  albeit  more  expensive,  AIS  Class  A 
devices in order to meet forthcoming requirements. 

All  users  are  reminded  to  maintain  their  AIS  in  effective  operating  condition  at  all  times, 
including  the  information  the  AIS  device  broadcasts.  Improper  operation  of  AIS  or  inaccurate 
information  could  subject  a  person  to  civil  penalties  not  to  exceed  $25,000  (46  USC  §70119).  For 
general  information  on  AIS,  carriage  requirements,  future  AIS  rulemakings  and  a  listing  of  Coast 
Guard  type-approved  AIS  Class  A  devices  which  require  a  software  update  in  order  to  display  AIS 
Class B information, visit http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/enav/ais .  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Waterways 
Management, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC, cgnav@uscg.mil.  

******* 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Distributed by: Office of Investigations and Analysis: http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

