 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 6, 2017 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 06-17 

Fuel Spray Fire - Déjà Vu 

Prepare and Prevent it from Happening to You! 

 

This safety alert addresses yet another fuel spray fire onboard a commercial vessel.  These types of 
incidents,  involving  fuel  leakages  contacting  hot  surfaces  and  igniting,  happen  too  frequently  and 
have  been  a  focus  of  various  marine  safety  organizations  such  as  the  IMO  for  many  years.    One 
recent  marine  casualty  involved  a  194  GRT  inspected  offshore  supply  vessel  with  an  unmanned 
engine  room.    This  engine  room  fire  led  to  significant  damage,  operational  down  time  of  the  vessel 
and lost company revenues.   Fortunately, no one was injured during this event. 
 
Investigators learned that the master received a main engine low fuel pressure alarm on the bridge 
which was then investigated by the crew.  The crew member on watch entered the engine room and 
identified a high pressure fuel leak spraying over and upon the port engine’s turbocharger.  He also 
reported a large quantity of diesel fuel in the bilge.  The master then went down into the engine room 
and  witnessed  the  ignition  of  the  fire.    Using  a  hand  held  portable  fire  extinguisher  he  quickly 
attempted to extinguish the fire without success. The master activated the general alarm, secured the 
hatches,  had  crew  members  secure  the  ventilation  dampers  and  closed  the  remote  fuel  shut-off 
valves to the engine room.  The fire then quickly self extinguished. 
  
During  the  post-casualty  inspection  of  the  engine 
room,  the  source  of  the  fuel  leak  was  identified  to 
be  a  rupture  on  a  flexible  fuel  hose  connected  to 
the  fuel  filter  assembly.    Additionally,  it  was  noted 
that  the  fuel  filter  assembly  and  its  components 
were  installed  in  relatively  close  proximity  to  the 
turbocharger  on  the  inboard  side  of  the  engine.  
Although components of the turbochargers may be 
insulated, temperatures on some surfaces typically 
exceed  the  fuel’s  ignition  point.    In  this  instance, 
the  heat 
turbo  charger 
components  was  very  high  and  likely  led  to  the 
degradation  of 
flexible  rubberized  hoses 
nearby. However, the installation was confirmed to 
be in accordance with an accepted location on the 
manufacturer’s marine engine manual.  

TTTuuurrrbbboooccchhhaaarrrgggeeerrr               
                                                                                         IIInnn sss uuu lllaaa ttt eee ddd                                           
                                                                               EEExxx hhh aaa uuu sss ttt    PPPiiippp iiinnn ggg    
 
             RRRuuuppptttuuurrreeeddd      
                                       FFFuuueeelll   HHHooossseee   
 
 
 
 
 
 
           

Following  the  casualty,  the  owner/operator  of  the  vessel  enacted  fleet-wide  changes  and  relocated 
the  fuel  filter  assemblies  away  from  the  turbochargers  on  the  outboard  side  of  the  engines  in  the 
vicinity of the fuel pumps.  
 
 

radiating 

from 

the 

the 

 

 

 

 

1 of 2 

Safety Alert 06-17 

 

The U.S. Coast Guard strongly recommends vessel owners and operators to regularly: 
 

•  Avoid  an  “out  of  sight,  out  of  mind  mentality.”      Unmanned  machinery  spaces  should  be 
inspected  at  least  daily,  but  preferably  several  times  per  day.    Those  who  perform  such 
activities should develop an eye for detail by tracing out and inspecting all equipment, systems, 
and components.  Such spaces should be well lit as good lighting will benefit mindsets of those 
within the spaces and enhance the ability to detect anomalies. 

 
• 

Inspect  fuel  and  lubricating  systems  closely  from  source  tanks  to  system  end  points.    Think 
about  system  vulnerabilities,  loose  or  missing  pipe  clamps  and  securing  devices,  wear  or 
chaffing  due  to  vibration  impacting  hoses,  and  piping  or  tubing  which  may  be  insufficiently 
secured.    Make  sure  plastic  piping  is  not  close  to  hot  spots.    Examine  fuel  supply  pumps, 
noting shaft sealing for leakages and bearings when fitted, for overheating and indications of 
wear. Pay similar attention to the pumps and motors associated with other systems. 
 

 
HHHooossseee   RRRuuuppptttuuurrreee   

•  Regarding  hot  spots;  examine  all  heat 
sources  particularly  with  respect  to  engine 
exhausts.  Look  closely  at  areas  where 
exhaust  piping  may  exit  the  space  and 
proceed  through  other  spaces.    Numerous 
fires  onboard  vessels  have  occurred  in 
these areas.  Ensure all insulation, blankets, 
and  lagging  are  maintained  and  kept  tight. 
Look  for  areas  where  released  fluids  may 
make contact.  Check that spray shielding is 
kept  in  place  where  used  and  consider 
adding  such  shielding  around  gasketed 
flanges and other areas if helpful. 
 

•  Minimize  the  use  of  nonmetallic  flexible  hoses  in  systems  carrying  flammable  liquids 
particularly around engine areas where failures leading to leakage or spray may find hot spots 
capable of igniting the fluids.  Consult with engine representatives if modifications are needed 
to minimize the risk of fuel spray fires. 
 
In this instance the installed engines and components were about three years old.  It may be 
beneficial for vessel owners to consult with engine manufacturer representatives to determine 
if  a  replacement  schedule  is  necessary  taking  into  account  hose  exposure  to  heat  sources, 
vibration, and other factors that may degrade the hose strength internally or externally. 
 

• 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational, or material requirements.  Developed by Marine Safety Unit Morgan 
City  and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.    Questions  or  comments 
may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil.  Similar alerts are available at the following links: 
 

https://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg545/alerts/1214.pdf 
https://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg545/alerts/0508.pdf 
https://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg545/alerts/ll1109.pdf 

 

2 of 2 

