February 4, 2005                                                                                                                  Alert 1-05
Washington, DC

GPS Receiver Manually-Entered Position Offsets May Cause Safety Hazard when Interconnected to
Navigation Devices

It  has  come  to  the  attention  of  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  that  certain  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)
receivers  do  not  provide  a  proper  indication  to  other  connected  equipment  when  manually-entered
position  offsets  are  entered  into  the  GPS  receiver.    Even  a  small  offset  could  result  in  danger  of
collision or other navigation safety hazard when the receiver is interconnected to devices such as an
automatic  identification  system  (AIS),  Electronic  Chart  Display  and  Information  System  (ECDIS),
integrated navigation systems (INS) or track control system (TCS).

The  problem  is  caused  by  an  error  in  the  NMEA  0183/IEC  61162  data  interface  Datum  Reference
(“DTM”) “local datum” field.  Navigation systems interconnected to the GPS receiver use this field to
determine  whether  the  position  received  is  referenced  to  World  Geodetic  System  84  (WGS84)  or
something different.  AIS equipment, for example, disregards external position information for reasons
of safety if the “local datum” field does not indicate WGS84.  As a result, equipment that is interfaced
to  GPS  receivers  having  this  problem  would  act  as  if  the  position  were  referenced  to  the  WGS84
datum, when in fact the position differs from the WGS84 datum by the manual offsets entered by the
vessel’s crew or captain.

The  problem  can  be  identified  if  own  ship  position  displayed  on  an  AIS  changes  in  proportion  to
manually-entered  offsets  entered  into  the  GPS  receiver  interconnected  to  the  AIS.    The  GPS  is
operating  correctly  in  such  a  situation  if  the  AIS  reverts  to  its  integral  GPS  and  disregards  the
manually-entered offsets sent from the externally-connected GPS.

GPS Receivers identified having this problem:

Furuno GP80
Furuno GP90

Mariners  having  these  receivers  are  advised  to  either  take  steps  to  ensure  that  the  manually-offset
feature is never and can never be used, or to disconnect these receivers from the AIS, ECDIS, INS,
TCS or other navigation or communications system.

Technical  questions  relating  to  this  alert  may  be  addressed  to  Mr.  Lee  Luft  at  (860)  441-2685  or
LLuft@rdc.uscg.mil.

This material is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any existing domestic or
international safety, operational or material requirement.

