  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 13, 2003 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

WEARING OF LIFE JACKETS 

      Safety Alert 03-03 
 

time, 

On  Saturday  morning,  June  14, 
2003  at  approximately  0715 
local 
the  Coast  Guard 
Inspected  Small  Passenger 
Vessel, 
the  M/V  TAKI-TOOO 
proceeded  across  the  bar  at 
Tillamook  Bay,  Oregon  carrying 
17  passengers  and  two  crew. 
During  the  bar  crossing,  a  large 
wave  struck  the  port  side  of  the 
TAKI-TOOO, 
the 
vessel.  Nine  people,  including 
the master, are known dead and 
two are missing. The preliminary 
findings  indicate  that  none  of 
the  nine  dead  wore 
life 
jackets. Six of the eight survivors wore/or held onto a life jacket. 

capsizing 

The  M/V  TAKI-TOOO  on  the  beach  near  Tillamook  Bay,  Oregon  after  it  capsized  on  June  14, 
2003.  

THE WEARING OF LIFE JACKETS WILL SAVE LIVES 

In  1996,  the  Coast  Guard  specifically  included  amendments  to  the  Small  Passenger  Vessel 
regulations  that  addressed  the  wearing  of  life  jackets,  aimed  at  incidents  such  as  this,  to  reduce 
deaths when people enter the water. The Coast Guard considered previous capsizings similar to 
the TAKI-TOOO accident when implementing these regulations.  

The previous capsizing incidents include the MERRY JANE, the SAN MATEO and other casualties 
where vessels capsized, or nearly capsized, during transits through bars or inlets with dangerous 
swells or breaking waves resulting in people thrown into or entering the water.  

This  safety  alert  reiterates  the  duty  of  masters  of  small  passenger  vessels  during  potentially 
hazardous conditions. Title 46, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 185, requires that the master of 
a  vessel  shall  require  passengers  to  don  life  jackets  when  possible  hazardous  conditions  exist 
including but not limited to: 

1.  When transiting hazardous bars or inlets;  
2.  During severe weather;  
3.  In the event of flooding, fire, or other events that may possibly call for evacuation; and  

1 

4.  When the vessel is being towed, except a non-self-propelled vessel under normal operating 

conditions.  

life 

jackets  when  possibly  hazardous  conditions  exist  may  make  passengers 
Donning 
apprehensive,  but  this  precaution  can  easily  be  explained  as  similar  to  wearing  seatbelts  during 
aircraft  take-offs  and  landings  and  periods  of  turbulence.  The  wearing  of  life  jackets  is  an  added 
safety measure required for passenger protection. The best time to don a life jacket is before it is 
needed - before people are in the water.  

The  Coast  Guard  has  entrusted  small  passenger  vessel  masters  to  use  their  judgment  to 
determine when to require the passengers to wear life jackets. Should Masters have questions 
concerning  “hazardous  conditions”  and  when  life  jackets  should  be  donned,  they  should  contact 
their  local  Coast  Guard  Officer  in  Charge,  Marine  Inspection  for  additional  guidance.  If  there  is 
doubt as to whether a hazardous condition exists, passengers and crew should don life jackets. 

The  Offices  of  Compliance  (G-MOC)  and  Investigations  and  Analysis  (G-MOA)  developed  this 
alert. Address any content questions to Mr. Scott Kuhaneck at tkuhaneck@comdt.uscg.mil.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

2 

 

