  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

TANK EXPLOSION 

      Safety Alert 09-02 
 

The Marine Safety Unit at Galveston, Texas reports the following casualty. Recently, a 13,700 GT 
Chemical tanker suffered a major tank explosion and fire at an offshore anchorage in the Gulf of 
Mexico.  The  early  morning  explosion  occurred  in  an  empty  cargo  tank  that  had  previously 
contained benzene.  

Upon nearing completion of tank washing while stripping the tank, the vessel's pumpman opened 
the tank top cover. Air immediately rushed in and an explosion occurred. The centerline bulkhead 
between the ignition space and the adjacent cargo tank ruptured. A fire also developed and was 
extinguished in twenty minutes by the ship's crew using a water/foam mixture.  

The  pumpman  was  severely  burned  and  required  an  evacuation  to  a  medical  facility.  The  cargo 
hold was severely damaged and resultant structural and machinery repair costs are expected to be 
significant.  

The investigation into this casualty is not complete. This information serves as a reminder and is 
provided  only  to  assist  vessel  owners,  operators,  shore-support  staff,  crews,  and  engineering 
personnel in assessing and understanding risks associated with the operation, maintenance, and 
repair of their vessels.  

 

1 

A  preliminary  investigation  reveals  that  the  upper  bearing  of 
the cargo pump located deep within the tank had failed. The 
shaft and impeller shifted axially one half an inch causing the 
impeller to contact and spin against the end plate of the pump 
casing.  The  resultant  friction  caused  extreme  heat  and 
possibly sparks which ignited the atmosphere in the tank. 

Pump and Motor Assembly 

The pump is driven by a drive shaft enclosed in an oil filled assembly. The shaft is rotated by an 
electric  motor  encased  in  an  explosion/weather-proof  housing  on  the  open  deck  above  the  tank. 
The  pump  end  known  as  the  "pump  head"  is  located  at  the  bottom  of  the  cargo  tank.  Two 
discharge  lines  are  provided  and  connected  at  the  pump  head,  one  for  normal  high  capacity 
discharge operations and another for "stripping" operations.  

When  the  cargo  tank  is  near  empty,  the  pump's  stripping  line  valve  is  opened  and  its  main 
discharge closed. The pump is kept running while the remaining product in the discharge line or in 
the tank is removed via the stripping line.  

Explosion  

When the tank top cover was opened, enough fresh air was introduced to allow the benzene vapor 
content  to  fall  below  the  upper  explosive  limit  and  into  the  explosive  range.  The  vapor  in  the 
presence  of  the  operating  but  severely  overheating  cargo  pump  components  ignited  and  caused 
the explosion.  

To reduce the risk of fatalities, injuries, environmental damage and severe economic loss the U.S. 
Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners,  operators,  superintendents,  port  engineers, 
shipboard engineers and crewmembers of vessels having similar equipment and systems:  

•    Ensure  that  the  proper  maintenance  and  repair  as  recommended  by  the  manufacturer  is 
accomplished for all pump, motor and drive components. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

 

2 

