 
 
 
 
 
October 23, 2008 
Washington, DC 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                   Alert 9-08 

ELECTRONICALLY-CONTROLLED CARGO PUMP ENGINE COMPONENTS 

  
For  many  years,  cargo  pump  engines  on  weather  decks  of  Subchapter  D  &  O  tank  barges  had 
mechanical-type  start  and  control  systems.    The  installation  of  electronically  controlled  engines  on 
tank  barges  since  the  1990s  has  introduced  non-approved  electrical  equipment  associated  with 
engine monitoring and control systems into hazardous locations (Class I, Division I) on thousands of 
tank barges nationwide. 
 
U.S. Coast Guard District Eight recognized this problem with John Deere manufactured engines and 
distributed enforcement guidance to their field units on November 22, 2005. Since then, John Deere 
has engineered retrofit packages for approximately 400 units and has gained approval from the U.S. 
Coast  Guard  Marine  Safety  Center  for  some  engine  models.    Because  of  widespread  use  of 
electronically  controlled  engines,  we  suspect  there  may  be  other  equipment  currently  in  use  that 
similarly is not designed or approved for hazardous locations.  Other manufacturers of these engines 
will likely need to follow suit with their own retrofit packages. 
 
46  CFR  111.105-31(1)  defines  Class  I  /  Division  1  locations  as  any  area  located  within  10  feet  (3 
meters) of a cargo tank vent outlet or ullage opening, or cargo pipe flange or valve on a tank barge 
that carries a flammable or combustible cargo with a flashpoint below 60 degrees C (140 degrees F).  
By  regulations,  electrical  equipment  located  in  hazardous  locations  must  be  approved  intrinsically 
safe, explosion-proof, or purged and pressurized. 
 
On John Deere electronically controlled cargo pump engines, electrical ignition sources were found in 
control panels, notification lights, alternators, batteries, computers, and associated wiring for engine 
sensors.  Since new components are still being designed and tested, it may be some time before all 
electronic  components  on  John  Deere  engines  can  be  re-engineered  and  retrofitted  for  hazardous 
locations.  Again, we suspect other makes of electronically controlled engines have the same issues. 
 
Until complete retrofit packages are designed and approved for these engines, vessel operators and 
OCMIs  should  take  immediate  steps  to  eliminate  the  risk  by  ensuring  all  electrical  components  on 
tank barges are in sound and serviceable condition, and those components that that are not suitable 
for hazardous locations are replaced as soon as possible. 
 
See the photographs below for examples of electrical components on electronically-controlled pump 
engines that should be examined, repaired or replaced.  All electric starters should be removed and 
replaced  with  a  hydraulic  starter  with  a  manual  hand  pump,  or  a  pneumatic  starter  with  the  air 
compressor located in a non-hazardous location. 

Alternators:  If  an  alternator  is  used,  it  should  be  an  approved 
flameproof or explosion proof alternator. 
 
Typical flame proof /explosion proof alternator.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  some  installations,  cables  between  the  alternator  and  battery 
were cut and a connector put in place to allow easier servicing. This 
alteration is not appropriate for hazardous locations.  The cable seal 
on  this  alternator  may  not  be  the  one  approved  for  the  alternator 
and may have to be examined.   
 
Cable  entries  on  flameproof  or  explosion  proof  enclosures  require 
sealing fittings that are suitable for the enclosure. 

in  explosion  proof 

Electronic  displays  should  be  enclosed 
enclosures. 
 
 
Typical  unacceptable  electronic  display.  This  is  not  in  an  explosion 
proof  enclosure.    The  beacon  installation  shown  here  outside  of  the 
enclosure is also unacceptable.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Typical  acceptable  electronic  display  –  This  particular  one  was 
approved  by  the  Marine  Safety  Center  (John  Deere  Part  No. 
RE531478) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Engine control units (ECU) should be installed 
in  an  explosion-proof  enclosure  or  outside  the 
hazardous zone. 
On this particular ECU, a large hole was drilled 
in  the  bottom  of  the  enclosure  with  multiple 
wiring  harnesses  coming  into  it  and  installed 
without  any  sealing  compound  installed  in  the 
  This 
cable  gland. 
in 
hazardous locations.  
 
An  acceptable  engine  control  unit 
(ECU) 
enclosure 
is  shown  here  with  a  sealing 
compound  installed  in  a  proper  cable  gland. 
Sealing  compound  poured  in  the  conduit  or 
cable seal fitting should surround each individual 
insulated  conductor  and  the  outer  jacket  of  the 
cable,  unless  the  cable  is  gas  tight.  Cables 
should be prevented from being pulled out of the 
conduit or cable seal fitting. 

is  not  acceptable 

 
Batteries  should  be  placed  in  explosion  proof 
enclosures  and  should  have  an  approved 
breather installed on top. 
 
An  acceptable  battery  installation  as  shown 
here,  approved  for  this  purpose  should  be  the 
“sealed, gel or AGM” types.  
 

 

 

 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Office of Domestic Vessel 
Activities (CG-5431), United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.  Questions should 
be directed to LT James T. Fogle at (202) 372-1038 or james.t.fogle@uscg.mil.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis: http://marineinvestigations.us 

To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

