October 24, 2005                                                                                                                      Alert 5-05 
Washington, DC 
 
Automatic Identification System (AIS) - Saab Transponder Timing Problem  
 
It has come to the attention of the U.S. Coast Guard that there is a functional timing problem with 
Saab R3 and R4 Class A mobile AIS equipment.  This timing problem creates a safety risk.  This 
timing problem results in increased interference with other mobile AIS equipment, as well as the 
possibility that broadcasts of the R3 and R4 will not be received by other models of Class A 
equipment.  Interference (slot collisions) can reduce the AIS communications quality, especially in 
regions with heavy use of AIS. 
 
Saab TransponderTech AB recommends that owners of the R3 and R4 transponder products contact 
their dealers for a software and equipment upgrade to repair the timing problem. 
 
Background:  All AIS equipment uses UTC time for synchronizing transmissions.  A leap second will 
be added to UTC time at midnight, 31 December 2005.  The leap second was introduced in the 
internal GPS receiver module in the R3 and R4 when the announcement of the additional leap 
second was made in July.  Due to the incorporation of the leap second, the timing of R3 and R4 
transmissions is in error by one second and will remain that way until 31 December 2005.   
 
This timing error causes each transmission to begin in the middle of a time slot rather than at the 
beginning of the time slot.  This results in the use of two time slots.  A normal transmission uses one 
time slot.  Therefore there is a risk that AIS transmissions from these transponders will interfere with 
the transmissions of other AIS equipment.  Also, because of variations in AIS receiver designs, these 
transmissions may not be received by certain brands of AIS equipment. 
 
To view the announcement from Saab TransponderTech AB - 
                                   http://www.uscg.mil/hq/g-m/moa/docs/Saab505.pdf  
 
Questions or comments regarding this safety alert may be addressed to Mr. Joe Hersey, Jr., Chief, 
Spectrum Management Division at 202.267.1358 or jhersey@comdt.uscg.mil. 
 
This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international, safety, operational, or material requirement. 

 

 

