 
 

 

 

Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

May 30, 2018 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Safety Alert 07-18 

Ethylene vapors activate Carbon Monoxide alarm. 

Take action, retreat, and avoid harm! 

 
During  an  examination  of  a  Liquefied  Gas  Carrier 
whose cargo tanks contained ethylene vapors, Port 
State Control Officers (PSCOs) received alarms on 
their portable 4 Gas meters giving a reading of 60 to 
100 parts per-million (PPM) Carbon Monoxide (CO).  
A  certified  marine  chemist  traced  the  source  of  the 
vapors to an eight inch crack on a cargo vapor line. 
PSCOs  initially  thought  the  alarm  was  related  to  a 
combustion event and did not suspect the ethylene 
vapors were the source because they did not get a 
Lower  Explosive  Limit  (LEL)  reading  on 
their 
monitors.  The chemist indicated that the LEL most 
likely never alarmed because of high winds on deck.  
He  further  explained  that  the  molecular  weight  of 
Ethylene  (28  g/mol)  was  identical  to  the  molecular 
weight  of  CO  which  accounted  for  the  CO  PPM 
readings.    Coast  Guard  personnel  contacted  the 
manufacturer  who  confirmed  that  gases  such  as 
methane,  propane,  ethylene  and  mercaptan,  could 
actuate the CO sensor without ever coming into the 
range of the LEL limits. 
 
A  similar  event  occurred  during  an  examination  of 
another  Liquefied  Gas  Carrier  which  was  loading  a 
cargo of ethylene.  While conducting training on the 
cargo tank top, the portable gas monitors of three PSCO team member’s began to alarm and read 60 
PPM  for  CO.    The  team  retreated  from  the  tank  top  and  discussed  their  suspicions  of  a  possible 
ethylene vapor release with the crew since no source of CO was evident in the area.  The vessel’s crew 
investigated with their portable gas detection equipment and confirmed hydrocarbon readings in the 
vicinity  of  where  the  PSCOs  received  their  CO  alarms.    Once  the  crew  confirmed  the  hydrocarbon 
readings, the PSC team departed the vessel and issued a COTP order restricting cargo operations until 
a marine chemist could identify the hydrocarbon source.  The attending marine chemist was unable to 
duplicate the readings.  However, the vessel’s crew informed the marine chemist and Sector personnel 
that they tightened a maintenance line flange on a cargo vapor line that they suspected was the source 
of the vapors.  Similar to the previous incident, the LEL alarm on the portable gas monitors carried by 
PSCOs never alarmed likely due to the high winds on deck at the time.   
 

Location of Leak 

 

Page | 1 

 
 
 
 

 

Safety Alert 07-18 

 
 
As a result of these events the Coast Guard strongly reminds all surveyors, marine inspectors, port 
state  control  examiners,  and  any  other  persons  utilizing  portable  gas  monitors  and  detectors  while 
working onboard on Liquefied Gas Carriers to remain acutely aware that the ethylene gas vapors can 
exhibit cross-sensitivity.  This issue is not limited to the monitors that the Coast Guard uses but also 
those made by other manufacturers.  Everyone using a monitor must be aware that if the CO alarm 
goes off it may be an indication of dangerous gases or chemical vapors and not the presence of CO. 
When the alarm sounds users must take corrective action to minimize exposure risks. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by Sector Houston-Galveston and 
the Liquefied Gas Carrier National Center of Expertise (LGC NCOE), Port Arthur, Texas and distributed 
by the Office of Investigations and Analysis. Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil 
or lgcncoe@uscg.mil. 
 

Page | 2 

