 
 
 
 
April 13, 2010                                                                                                                Alert 02-10 
Washington, DC                                 

 

DANGERS ASSOCIATED WITH AUTOMATIC CHANNEL SWITCHING  

ON DIGITAL SELECTIVE CALLING (DSC) EQUIPPED VHF MARINE RADIOS 

feature  when  maintaining  a 

the  automatic  channel  switching 

 
It  has  come  to  the  Coast  Guard’s  attention  that  an  automatic  channel  switching  feature  found  on 
certain  models  of  Digital  Selective  Calling  (DSC)  equipped  VHF  marine  radios  may  create  an 
unintended hazard by automatically switching from a working channel that might be in use at the time 
to  Channel  16  when  the  VHF  marine  radio  receives  a  DSC  distress  alert,  distress  alert 
acknowledgment or other DSC call where a VHF channel number has been designated.  This could 
happen without a vessel/radio operator’s immediate knowledge and could initiate an unsafe condition 
by  which  the  vessel/radio  operators  would  believe  they  were  communicating  on  a  working  channel 
such as Channel 13 when, in fact, they were actually on Channel 16.  Imagine a towboat operator on 
the  lower  Mississippi  River  making  passing  agreements  on  VHF  channel  67  and  then  suddenly, 
without  warning,  not  being  able  to  quickly  reestablish  communications  with  those  vessels  because 
his/her radio automatically switched to Channel 16 instead. 
 
Since  this  unsafe  condition  can  happen  at  any  time,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends 
disabling 
listening  watch  or 
communicating  on  the  designated  bridge-to-bridge  radiotelephone,  or  while  monitoring  the  vessel 
traffic services (VTS) channel.  Radios that lack the disabling feature should not be used for bridge-
to-bridge or VTS communications.   
 
The  International  Telecommunications  Union  Sector  for  Radiocommunications,  Recommendation 
M.493-11 published in 2004 and later versions require DSC-equipped radios to provide for disabling 
of this channel auto-switch feature.  In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) requires all DSC-equipped radios certified after March 25, 2009 to meet this requirement.   
Manufacturers  that  do  not  provide  a  disable  function  are  encouraged  to  do  so  and  to  inform  their 
customers if means for correction exist.  Updated information including a listing of manufacturers of 
radios  believed 
this  Safety  Alert  will  be  posted  as  available  at 
http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/marcomms/gmdss/dsc.htm . 
 
The  Coast  Guard  strongly  reminds  radio  operators  and  other  users  to  always  ensure  they  are  on 
the  proper  operating  channel  when  communicating  or  maintaining  watch,  particularly  with  DSC-
equipped radios capable of channel auto-switching.   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Spectrum  Management 
and  Telecommunications  Policy  Division  (CG-652),  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters, 
Washington,  DC.    Questions  should  be  directed  to  Mr.  Russell  Levin  at  (202)  475  3555  or 
Russell.S.Levin@uscg.mil. 

to  be  affected  by 

 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

******* 

 

 

