 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 8, 2018  
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Safety Alert 10-18 

We’ve all experienced bad gas, but how about IFO 380? 

U.S. Gulf Coast Bunker Contamination 

This safety alert raises awareness of a significant emerging problem in the U.S. Gulf Coast region 
regarding contaminated vessel fuel oil bunkers.  This involves blended fuels oil such as Intermediate 
Fuel  Oil  (IFO  380)  and  has  caused  fouled  fuel  pump  plungers,  fuel  pump  seizures  and  other  fuel 
system related failures.  Furthermore, the fuel may increase sediment levels at separators and fuel 
filters and, in some cases, may completely clog filters.  The standard fuel oil test methods found in 
the ISO 8217 specification will not detect these underlying problems.   
 
One fuel testing organization that performed marine fuel analysis on affected vessels that experienced 
fuel oil system problem found that phenolic compounds and long chain fatty acids were present in the 
fuel.  Another  fuel  testing  organization  identified  similar  contaminants  in  fuels  they  sampled.  The 
contaminant was identified as phenolic compound 4-Cumyl-Phenol (CAS No. 599-64-4) and all fuel 
oil  samples  were  found  to  be  in  the  concentration  range  of  300ppm  to  1,000ppm.  This  4-Cumyl-
Phenol  has many  industrial  applications due to  its adhesive  qualities  including  the manufacture of 
epoxy resins as well as is used as an emulsifier in pesticides.  Sampling and analysis has determined 
this contamination is not limited to one fuel supplier but exists across many.  No definitive source has 
been identified but it’s presumed to be associated with the use of fuel oil cutter stocks.  Cutter stocks 
are generally lighter petroleum products that are added to heavy fuel to reduce its viscosity. 
 
This fuel oil contamination could lead to engine failures and associated losses of propulsion potentially 
having catastrophic and wide ranging consequences. The presence of these substances within the 
fuel is in violation of MARPOL Annex VI regulation 18.3 and Clause 5 of ISO 8217 which indicates 
the fuel  shall not  include any  added  substance  or  chemical  waste which  jeopardizes  the safety  or 
adversely affects the performance of the machinery; or is harmful to personnel; or contributes overall 
to additional air pollution. 
 
One fuel testing organization makes the following recommendations to vessel owners and operators:  

•  Pay attention to the terms of the bunker requisition. 
•  Specify that the fuel must be absent of abnormal components. 
•  Determine the acid number of the fuel. 
•  Carefully pay attention to the fuel supply and fuel injection equipment onboard the vessel. 

 
The Coast Guard recommends that vessel owners and managers ensure vessel operators are made 
aware of this potential hazardous condition, closely monitor fuel oil system components and consult   
their bunker suppliers and other technical service providers regarding this issue. 
 
Additional information may be found: 

https://www.fobas.com/bulletin/109 
http://www.v-p-s.com/latest-news/ 

 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international safety, operational or material requirement. 
Developed and distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis. Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
 

Page | 1 

