 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 18, 2008  
Washington, DC    
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                       Alert 11-08  

FISHING VESSEL STABILITY 

This Safety Alert addresses the issue of unsafe loading practices onboard commercial fishing 
vessels.   
 
One  contributory  factor  in  a  recent  major  marine  casualty  on  an  uninspected  commercial 
fishing vessel was improper loading of the vessel’s fuel, water, fishing gear and catch.  In this 
instance, the vessel’s crew relied on an outdated stability book to determine the safe loading 
condition  of  the  vessel.    The  stability  book  being  used  failed  to  account  for  heavy  fishing 
equipment  that  had  been  removed  from  the  vessel  as  well  as  new  fish  processing  and 
equipment additions when it changed fishery operations. 
 
As  a  result  of  this  incident  and  due  to  other  related  casualties  involving  commercial  fishing 
vessels, the U. S. Coast Guard strongly recommends vessel owners and operators to:  
 
Review their stability book and ensure that it reflects the vessel’s current design, equipment, 
and operations.  Stability books, even when not required by regulation, should be maintained 
and used to ensure proper vessel loading.  Many commercial fishing vessels are not required 
to be inspected or have load lines but still may have stability information that discusses how 
the vessel should be loaded and how fuel should be burned.  If the vessel details provided in 
the stability book do not match the actual vessel, the recommended loading procedures in the 
outdated stability book could negatively alter the stability; 
 
Conduct a new stability review when a vessel changes operations (e.g. new fisheries) if such 
operations are not already accounted for in the vessel’s stability book.  For example changing 
fishing operations from shrimp to King Crab may involve significant equipment changes on a 
vessel that results in a much greater load which could alter the vessel’s stability; 
 
Conduct  a  new  stability  review  if  significant  weight  changes  are  made  to  the  vessel  as  a 
result of adding or removing equipment.  For example, changing the material that fishing pots 
are composed of may change the weight of each pot.  Depending on the type of fishing being 
conducted,  hundreds  of  pots  could  be  carried.    The  resulting  weight  difference  and  storage 
location of the pots could alter the vessel’s stability; 
 
Ensure  that  vessel  masters  and  engineers  are  familiar  with  the  contents  of  their  vessel’s 
stability  book  and  understand  how  to  use  the  loading  information.    Stability  information  is 
useless  unless  put  into  practice.    Vessel  masters  and  engineers  must  be  familiar  with  this 
information to ensure that their vessel is loaded as designed at all times.   
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any 
domestic  or  international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the 
Office of Investigations and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, 
DC.  
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us  
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil  

