 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 26, 2007                                                                                                                 Alert 4-07 
Washington, DC 
 

Hammar Manual Remote Release System Pneumatic Pump Units 

 
An  investigation  into  the  circumstances  surrounding  a  recent  passenger  ship  grounding  revealed 
difficulties the crew had in manually deploying the vessel’s liferafts from their mounting cradles.  The 
liferafts  were  fitted  with  individual  Hammar  Manual  Remote  Release  System  (MRRS)  pneumatic 
vacuum pump units.  When the pumps are manually operated a vacuum is quickly and easily created 
that actuates a corresponding Hammar H20 hydrostatic release unit.  In this case a large number of 
those pumps failed to activate the hydrostatic release units and, ultimately, the crew had to manually 
cut the liferaft canister lashings.  The crew was able to launch all of the vessel's liferafts successfully 
in this manner.   
 
The  casualty  investigation  is  not  complete  and  additional  recommendations  are  likely  to  follow.  
However,  in  the  interim,  the  United  States  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  Hammar  MRRS 
pneumatic pump units, as well as all other survival equipment, be maintained in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommended maintenance schedules.   
 

as 

required. 

letters  on  a 

MRRS pump units are clearly marked 
in  black 
yellow 
background  on  the  cylinder  housing, 
“Lubricate piston every second year.”  
The  pumps  that  failed  had  not  been 
lubricated 
The 
malfunctioning  MRRS  pumps  were 
replaced 
in  kind  with  new  units; 
USCG  inspection  showed  that  the 
new 
properly.  
Owners,  operators,  port  engineers, 
inspectors  and  others 
in 
vessel  safety  should  ensure  that  all 
appropriate  steps  are 
to 
properly maintain survival equipment. 

operated 

involved 

taken 

units 

Questions or comments regarding this safety alert may be addressed to Mr. George Grills of the U.S. 
Coast  Guard  Headquarters  Lifesaving  and  Fire  Safety  Standards  Division  at  202.372.1385  or 
george.g.grills@uscg.mil.  This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not 
relieve any domestic or international safety, operational or material requirement. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

