 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 1, 2004   
Washington, DC   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alert 4-04 

Loss of INMARSAT C Safety Messages 

 
This advisory notifies users of Inmarsat C ship earth stations that urgent marine information, weather 
warning and navigational warning broadcast messages, distress-related messages, as well as routine 
messages may be lost if a printer is not connected to and maintained with the Inmarsat C terminal, or 
if  floppy  drive  maintenance  is  not  regularly  performed  on  the  terminal.  Additionally,  certain  non-
GMDSS-approved software (e.g. windows-based software) may freeze up if this maintenance is not 
performed. 
 
All GMDSS versions of Inmarsat C have approved data terminal equipment (DTE) that interfaces with 
the user. DTE generally refers to the computer and screen, keyboard and printer (or user interface). 
These terminals are required to use only Inmarsat approved hardware and software. However, users 
need to understand that proper usage and housekeeping maintenance of the equipment is essential 
to ensure optimum user availability.  
 
To  avoid  problems,  and  to  ensure  that  unnecessary  and  irrelevant  messages  are  not  received,  the 
recommended  operating  procedures  in  the  manufacturer’s  equipment  operating  handbook  and  the 
below procedures should be followed:  
 
Message/Archive  Log:  All  ingoing  and  outgoing  messages  are  recorded  on  a  disk  in  special  log 
files.  Each  log  file  may  hold  a  limited  number  of  messages  (limited  by  disk  size  or  PC  storage 
capacity).  When  the  free  disk  space  falls  below  a  certain  size,  the  terminal  will  display  an  error 
message asking to insert an empty disk. A new message/archive log file will then be generated on the 
new disk.  
 
Disk Directory: If so configured, ingoing and outgoing messages (OUT.xxx, IN.xxx, EGC.xxx) can be 
stored on a disk (this is different than the message/archive log), where they can be viewed, erased, 
printed and copied to different directories. On some models the directory shows the number of files 
(messages) stored on the disk/directory and this number is limited to 112 files (messages) regardless 
the  free  space  left.  If  the  disk  already  holds  112  messages,  you  will  not  be  able  to  store  any  more 
messages. When the disk is full, use the “erase/delete” command to delete unwanted files and create 
free space for new messages.  
 
Message  Routing:  Check  the  message  routing  option  on  the  terminal.  Incoming  mail  should  be 
routed to at least one of the output media – disk or printer. Enhanced Group Call (EGC) SafetyNET 
messages with Urgency and Distress priority will be printed out automatically, if a printer is fitted.  

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EGC SafetyNET messages with Safety priority can be printed out (user option), otherwise they will be 
stored on the disk. EGC FleetNET messages can be printed out (user option), otherwise they will be 
stored on the disk. If the Inmarsat C is connected to a separate PC, a path for saving incoming and 
outgoing mail and EGC messages should be inserted/specified per the manufacturer’s handbook.  
 
EGC  SafetyNET  setting-up:  Ensure  that  you  are  logged  into  the  appropriate  satellite  for  the 
scheduled maritime safety information (MSI) that you wish to receive. Otherwise log in to the satellite 
that broadcasts the MSI for your required area of operation. Timetables of broadcast and nominated 
satellites  can  be  found  in  various  national/international  publications,  such  as  the  International 
Maritime Organization GMDSS/Circ.8  
(see  http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/marcomms/gmdss/reference_gmdss.htm)  or  the  Admiralty  List  of 
Radio Signals, Vol.5. Ensure that your position (Lat/Long) on the Mobile Earth Station (MES) position 
screen is valid. Otherwise you will receive and print ALL EGC SafetyNET messages broadcast via the 
satellite. If automatic position updating is not available, it is essential to manually update the position 
on a regular basis e.g. every 4 hours. Instructions for doing this are in the manufacturer’s handbook.  
 
If  properly  set-up,  your  MES  will  receive  automatically  all  relevant  NAVAREA/METAREA  and  other 
maritime  safety  information  addressed  to  the  area  where  you  are  in.  If  you  require  additional 
information  for  neighboring  area(s),  you  must  program  your  terminal  to  receive  this  information.  Be 
careful if using the “EGC only” option. If this option is selected, the terminal will, effectively, be logged 
out and you will not be able to receive normal messages (mail) on your terminal. Also, if you choose 
“EGC only”, previous EGC settings may be ignored and the terminal may receive all EGC messages 
within the ocean region.  
 
If Inmarsat C is used for communication (not as a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) 
or “black box” terminal), it MUST have a DTE terminal which includes a keyboard, Video Display Unit 
and printer. Every Inmarsat C terminal, if properly configured, set up and maintained, will receive all 
relevant messages addressed to it. These messages will be displayed or printed out, stored, or both. 
Improper  settings,  including  printer  settings,  not  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer’s  instructions, 
will degrade the performance.  
 
This advisory was developed in cooperation with Inmarsat Ltd.  
 
Technical questions relating to this alert may be addressed to Mr. Russell Levin at 202.267.1389 or 
CGComms@comdt.uscg.mil.  
 
This material is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any existing domestic or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  
 

 

 

