January 19, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 
 Safety Alert 01-16 

Global Navigation Satellite Systems – Trust, But Verify 

Report Disruptions Immediately 

 
Do  you  know  what  equipment  relies  upon  the  U.S.  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)  signal?    How  would 
you  respond  if  you  lost  the  signal?    This  past  summer,  multiple  outbound  vessels  from  a  non-U.S.  port 
suddenly lost GPS signal reception.  The net effect was various alarms and a loss of GPS input to the ship’s 
surface search radar, gyro units and Electronic Chart Display & Information System (ECDIS), resulting in no 
GPS  data  for  position  fixing,  radar  over  ground  speed  inputs,  gyro  speed  input  and  loss  of  collision 
avoidance  capabilities  on  the  radar  display.    Fortunately,  the  vessels  were  able  to  safely  continue  their 
voyage using radar in heads up display, magnetic compass and terrestrial navigation.  Approximately 6nm 
later, the vessels’ GPS units resumed operation.  Although the vessels had back-up systems to allow a safe 
transit,  the  consequences  could  have  been  severe.    These  types  of  events  highlight  the  potential 
detrimental  impact  to  navigation  caused  by  GPS  interference  or  jamming  and  the  importance  in 
understanding how your vessel’s or facility’s equipment could be impacted by a loss of GPS signal. 
 
Whether  walking  through  the  city,  driving  across  town  or  navigating  the  world,  Global  Navigation  Satellite 
Systems (GNSS) have become an integral part of everyday life.  However, at times, the positioning signals 
may be impacted by interference from both natural and human-made sources.  The most common types of 
interference  are  reception  issues,  usually  due  to  bad  installations,  poor  antenna  positioning  or  faulty 
equipment.  Jamming devices (https://transition.fcc.gov/eb/jammerenforcement/fccdhssj.pdf), while illegal in 
the U.S. and a threat to safety, have been used for nefarious or deceptive purposes.  Interference can also 
be  unintentionally  caused  when  operating  GNSS  in  close  proximity  to  other  radiating  devices,  such  as 
amplified  TV  antennas  (see  our  Safety  Alert  11-02).    Therefore,  it  is  important  to  remember  to  use  all 
available means for navigation and maintain proficiency so you can still navigate should your primary GPS 
fail. 
 
Indicators of positioning systems interference include an intermittent signal, no signal, or an incorrect signal.  
Suspected  or  suspicious  disruptions  should  be  reported  immediately.    Critical  information  to  take  note  of 
during a disruption event includes location, time, and period of outage. 
 
Commercial  operators  are  reminded,  should  your  navigation  or  other  equipment  onboard  (e.g.  AIS)  be 
impaired as a result of a disruption or interference, this should be reported to the nearest U.S. Coast Guard 
Captain  of  the  Port,  District  Commander  or  Vessel  Traffic  Center  as  soon  as  possible;  and,  await  further 
directions (per 33 CFR 164.53). 
 
All  operators  should  be  aware,  vigilant,  and  immediately  report  GPS  disruptions  to  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard 
Navigation  Center  (NAVCEN).    The  report  will  be  disseminated  to  the  U.S.  Air  Force  GPS  Operations 
Center and the Federal Aviation Administration in an attempt to identify the problem and correlate with any 
other  GPS  incidents  in  the  same  general  geographic  location.    Depending  on  the  severity  of  the  report, 
NAVCEN may refer it to law enforcement and/or other federal agencies for further investigation. 
 
Reporting a disruption - or other navigation hazards or aids to navigation outages - is simple, and can be 
done electronically (http://www.navcen.uscg.gov - the preferred method) or phone call to the NAVCEN (703-
313-5900), 24 hours a day. 
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Questions  should  be  forwarded  to  the  Coast 
Guard  Navigation  Center  at  703-313-5900  or 
the  NAVCEN  website, 
http://www.navcen.uscg.gov. 

via  email  using 

 

