 

 
 
 
 

April 3, 2018 
Washington, DC 

Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

Safety Alert 04-18 

 

Compliance with SOLAS and USCG Regulations for  

Operation of Main Propulsion and Essential Auxiliary Machinery  

Lessons Learned from the S.S. EL FARO Casualty 

 

 

 
The purpose of this Alert is to inform operators of the role that the 
main propulsion lube oil system was found to have played in the EL 
FARO  casualty.    This  alert  also  recommends  that  operators, 
especially  ship  engineers,  review  the  operational  procedures  and 
limitations of vital propulsion machinery, and verify compliance with 
SOLAS, Classification Society and regulatory standards. 
 
The  Coast  Guard  Marine  Board  Report  on  the  sinking  of  the  EL 
FARO,  with  33  lives  lost,  revealed  that  loss  of  propulsion  during 
extremely heavy weather was a contributing factor to the sinking of 
the  vessel.    The  exact  operational  status  of  all  vital  EL  FARO 
engineering  equipment  during  the  hours  preceding  the  casualty 
could not be determined.  However, bridge audio recordings indicate 
that the vessel lost lube oil pressure to the main propulsion turbine 
and  reduction  gear  bearings,  resulting  in  loss  of  propulsion.    It  is 
believed  that  the  vessel’s  substantial  list,  coupled  with  trim  by  the 
bow,  caused  the  main  engine  lube  oil  pump  to  lose  suction.    A 
detailed modeling and static analysis of EL FARO’s lube oil system 
determined  that  a  severe  inclination  of  the  ship,  coupled  with  a 
relatively low volume of oil in the sump, would likely result in a loss 
of pump suction.  Figure 1 shows examples (at a constant lube oil 
volume) of the position of the suction bellmouth relative to the level 
of lube oil in the sump in several heel and trim conditions.  This static 
model  does  not  attempt  to  address  the  sloshing  of  lube  oil  in  the 
sump caused by vessel motions.  
 
The  Coast  Guard  notes  that, although the EL FARO’s engineering 
plant configuration was similar in design to most steam turbine ships 
of  a  similar  age, the  vast  majority  of  large  oceangoing  commercial 
ships currently operating have marine diesel engines as the primary 
source  of  ship  propulsion.    However,  failure  of  a  vessel’s  lube  oil 
system  generally  means  a  loss  of  propulsion  for  all  types  of 
engineering plants.  For a single-turbine ship like EL FARO, this type 
of  casualty  would  result  in  a  total  loss  of  maneuverability  until  the 
system can be restored. 
 
Title  46  of  the  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  (46  CFR),  Section 
58.01-40,  requires  that  propulsion  machinery  and  all  auxiliary 
 

0 degree list, 0 degree trim 

15 degree port list, 0 degree trim 

15 degree port list, 5 degree trim by the bow 

15 degree port list, 5 degree trim by the stern 

Figure 1:  EL FARO’s main engine lubricating 
oil  sump  and  off-center,  aft  oil  suction 
bellmouth.    Lubricating  oil  is  shown  in 
green.    The  pump’s  ability  to  maintain 
suction is affected by vessel list, trim, and 
motions, and the volume of oil in the sump. 

machinery essential to the propulsion and safety of the vessel (such as the lube oil system) be designed to 
operate: 
 

a)  when the vessel is upright, 
b)  when the vessel is inclined under static conditions at any angle of list up to and including 15°, and 
c)  when the vessel is inclined under dynamic conditions (rolling) at any angle of list up to and including 
22.5° degrees and, simultaneously, at any angle of trim (pitching) up to and including 7.5° by the bow 
or stern. 

 
The International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), Chapter II-1, Regulation 26.6, essentially 
has the same requirements as 46 CFR 58.01-40.    
 
There is no compelling evidence to suggest that U.S. vessels are not in compliance with the above CFR and 
SOLAS standards.  However, given the criticality of propulsion and essential auxiliary machinery, particularly 
in heavy weather or high-traffic areas, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that: 

•  Operators  verify  that  their  main  propulsion  machinery,  essential  auxiliary  systems,  and  emergency 
generators are designed in compliance with the CFR, SOLAS and Classification Society requirements 
for operation in static and dynamic conditions of list and trim. 

•  Engineering  Department  personnel  review  the  design,  arrangement,  limiting  angles  of  inclination, 
normal and limiting high/low lubricating oil sump levels, and casualty control procedures for all systems 
vital to the propulsion and safety of the vessel to better understand the possible ways to mitigate the 
effects of heavy weather on vessel operations. 

This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international 
safety, operational, or material requirements.  Developed by the Office of Design and Engineering Standards. 
Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

 

 
 

2 
 

