 
 
 
 
July 13, 2009                                                                                                                      Alert 04-09 
Washington, DC 

EPIRB and PLB REGISTRATION 

 

 
This  Safety  Alert  addresses  the  importance  of  ensuring  your  Emergency  Position  Indicating  Radio 
Beacon  (EPIRB)  and  Personal  Locator  Beacon  (PLB)  are  properly  registered  with  the  National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).   
 
One  of  the  circumstances  surrounding  a  recent  major  marine  casualty  involving  an  uninspected 
commercial  fishing  vessel  was  the  improper  registration  of  the  vessel’s  EPIRB.    The  Unique 
Identification Number (UIN) entered into NOAA’s registration database was different from the actual 
UIN  programmed  into  the  EPIRB  by  the  manufacturer  and  transmitted  to  the  Search  and  Rescue 
Satellite System after the vessel sank.  The improper registration of this vessel’s EPIRB delayed the 
notification  to  Search  and  Rescue  personnel,  and  subsequently  delayed  the  launching  of  rescue 
assets. 
 
The  Search  and  Rescue  Satellite-Aided  Tracking  (SARSAT)  System  is  composed  of  stationary  and 
orbiting satellites.  For any given location (outside of the Polar Regions), there is continuous coverage 
by  a  stationary  satellite,  and  coverage  by  an  orbiting  satellite  every  60  to  75  minutes  on  average 
(which  includes  the  Polar  Regions).    The  stationary  satellites  can  receive  all  of  the  information 
transmitted by an EPIRB or PLB, but they are not capable of determining the position of the beacon 
unless the beacon has an optional GPS receiver (not all models carry this option).  Normally, position 
identification  is  accomplished  by  the  orbiting  satellites.    So,  if  a  beacon  is  not  equipped  with  the 
optional GPS, it could take up to 100 minutes for the orbiting satellites to identify the location of the 
beacon.   
 
In the case of this casualty, the first notification was received by a stationary satellite soon after the 
vessel sank, but the orbiting satellites were not within range and the improper registration prevented 
the  identification  of  the  vessel’s  name,  homeport  and  emergency  contact  information  from  being 
forwarded to the Search and Rescue authorities. 
 
As a result of this incident NOAA has commenced an important safety initiative, emailing and mailing 
all  owners/operators  of  EPIRBs  and  PLBs  registered  in  the  U.S.  National  Beacon  Registration 
Database, and requesting that they follow the steps listed below.  The U.S. Coast Guard supports this 
initiative, and strongly recommends all vessel owners and operators: 
 
1.  Confirm that current EPIRB and PLB registrations are correct.  Cross-check that the UIN printed 
by the manufacturer on your EPIRB or PLB matches the UIN printed on the proof-of-registration 
decal  sent  to  you  by  NOAA.    The  manufacturer-provided  UIN  is  usually  found  on  the  exterior  of 
the  beacon,  although  in  some  cases  the  UIN  is  printed  inside  the  beacon,  under  the  beacon’s 
battery.  You can also cross-check that the above UINs match the NOAA registration database by 
visiting  the  National  Beacon  Registration  website  at:  www.beaconregistration.noaa.gov  and 
choosing one of the links for your existing beacon registration. 
 

If  any  of  the  numbers  or  letters  in  the  UINs  are  different,  your  beacon  may  not  be  registered 
properly  and  you  should  contact  NOAA  immediately  at:  (301)  817-4515  or  1-888-212-SAVE 
(7283).   

 
2.  Update  EPIRB  and  PLB  registrations  if  there  are  any  changes  to  the  vessel  information, 
owner/operator information, emergency contact information, or if your registration information has 
expired.    Registration  data  must  be  renewed  every  two  years.    Updates  and  renewals  can  be 
made using the same registration methods listed below. 
 

3.  Register  new  or  previously  unregistered  EPIRBs  and  PLBs  with  NOAA  via  the  internet  at: 
www.beaconregistration.noaa.gov.    Note:  Registration  is  mandatory  and  is  required  by  Federal 
Regulation. 

 

Alternatively, you can mail the registration form which can be found in the beacon’s packaging, or 
downloaded from the beacon registration website provided above, to the following address:  
 

Beacon Registration 
NOAA/NESDIS,  
NSOF, E/SP3 
4231 Suitland Road 
Suitland, MD 20746 

 
The registration form can also be faxed to: (301) 817-4565.  

 
If you have already received a registration safety notification from NOAA and responded accordingly, 
no further action is required until your next beacon renewal or update. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Design  and 
Engineering  Standards,  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC  and  the  NOAA 
Search and Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking (SARSAT) Program Office, Suitland, MD. 

 

 
                                                                        ******* 
 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

