  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 3, 1996 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 02-96 
 

HEATING TAPE CONCERNS 

To: All District Fishing Vessel Safety Coordinators 
 
Subj: USE OF HEATING TAPE ON COMMERCIAL FISHING VESSELS 
Ref: (a) 46 CFR Part 28 

1. Last year, a commercial fishing vessel fire resulted in one fatality and the total constructive loss 
of the vessel. The fire started in a refrigerated hold which was insulated with combustible 
insulation. A subsequent investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
revealed that the fire was caused by an improper separation of heating tape from combustible 
insulation.  

2. Fires involving combustible insulations covering interior surfaces can spread rapidly and be very 
difficult to extinguish. Reference (a) permits the use of combustible insulation in cargo spaces and 
refrigerated compartments. However, reference (a) (46 CFR 28.380(b)) also requires that "an 
internal combustion engine exhaust, galley uptake, or similar source of ignition must be kept clear 
of ... combustible material."  

3. Heating tape can be used to prevent freezing in pipes which contain water and are in an area 
subject to freezing. Heating tape, which generates heat by electric resistance, is considered a 
"similar source of ignition" under 46 CFR 28.380(b), and should be kept clear of combustible 
insulation.  

4. Please use all reasonable means of communication available to bring this information about the 
hazards of combustible insulation to the attention of members of the commercial fishing vessel 
fleet.  

Original signed on Dec. 20, 1995  

by G. F. WRIGHT By direction  

Copy: G-MCO-2, G-MAO-1, NTSB  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

1 

