  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 14 1997 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

PROPELLER CLEARING PORT HAZARD 

      Safety Alert 07-97 
 

In August of 1996 a commercial fishing vessel capsized while tending hagfish traps 13 nautical miles south 
east of Cape Elizabeth, Maine. The crew of the vessel first noticed the flooding condition while recovering 
fishing  gear,  but  were  unable  to  determine  the  source  of  the  flooding.  Within  10  minutes  the  vessel 
capsized. The vessel's crew safely abandoned the vessel into a liferaft.  Following the salvage of the vessel, 
Coast Guard investigators determined that the source of the flooding was a loose hatch cover on a propeller 
clearing port. This port allows the crew easy access to the propeller so that they can clear away fouled line, 
fishing gear and debris that may have become fouled in the vessel's propeller. 

In  this  incident,  the  vessel's  master  had  removed  the  propeller 
clearing port hatch cover the day prior to the accident to clear away 
a  line  that  had  become  entangled  in  the  propeller.  Coast  Guard 
investigators believe that this hatch was not properly secured after it 
had  been  opened  and  loosened  at  some  point  the  following  day 
which then led to the flooding of the vessel.The Coast Guard feels 
that propeller clearing ports such as this are becoming more popular 
on  vessels constructed to  tend  stationary  fishing  gear  because  the 
gear  itself  is  more  likely  to  become  fouled  on  the  propeller. 
Stationary fishing gear includes lobster and hagfish traps, as well as 
gillnets and longlines. Because the hatches of the propeller clearing 
ports  are  typically  placed  above  a  vessel's  waterline,  some  vessel 
operators  may  underestimate  the  risk  of  flooding  associated  with 
them.  The  assumption  is  that  sea  water  will  not  rise  up  through  a 
hatch  opening  that  is  above  the  waterline.  However,  because 
propeller  clearing  ports  are  placed  in  the  same  plane  as  the 
propeller in order that a fouled propeller can be easily cleared, any 
side  wash  from  the  vessel's  propeller  when  it  is  operating  will  act 
like a pump and place considerable water pressure on the clearing 
port hatch opening. The pumping action of the propeller can, in some cases, be in excess of 1000 gallons 
per minute.  

The photograph demonstrates what happens when a vessel is maneuvered with a loose clearing port hatch 
cover.  This  vessel's  clearing  port  hatch  is  located  on  the  weather  deck,  which  makes  flooding  easy  to 
detect.      The  Coast  Guard  advises  fishermen  considering  the  installation  of  propeller  clearing  ports  to 
design the ports with the access hatch on the vessel's main deck. On vessels with access hatches placed 
below the main deck, a means should be provided to prevent the hatch from unintentional opening, such as 
the  use  of  double  nuts,  safety  wiring  of  the  bolts,  etc...  The  Coast  Guard  strongly  advises  against  the 
installation of clearing ports below the main deck in hulls that are not fitted with watertight bulkheads. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

1 

