July 20, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 
 Safety Alert 07-16 

STEM TO STERN, FOAM TO DUST 

INSPECTING YOUR LIFEJACKETS IS A MUST! 

 
This safety alert reminds all vessel operators to routinely inspect 
their lifejackets to ensure they are suitable for service.  Recently 
Coast  Guard  inspectors  in  Key  West,  Florida  discovered  two 
vessels  that  had  over  60  lifejackets  that  were  required  to  be 
removed  and  destroyed.  It  was  discovered  that  the  unicellular 
foam buoyant material within the nylon outer shell had degraded 
significantly  over  time,  broke  apart,  crumbled  and  in  some 
instances  was  reduced  to  dust.  The  lifejackets  were  properly 
stored,  kept  dry,  and  not  under  direct  sunlight;  however,  the 
location was very hot at times.  
 
These  particular  lifejackets  were  the  Type  1,  160RT  model 
distributed  by  “The  Safeguard  Corporation”  of  Covington, 
Kentucky.  They  were  manufactured  in  China  and  approximately 
nine years old.  The distributor is no longer in business.  Over the 
years, the Coast Guard has distributed a number of other safety 
alerts  related  to  lifejackets  and  personal  floatation  devices 
(PFDs).  The  archive  of  alerts  can  be  accessed  at  the  following 
site:  http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg545/alerts/96_14SA.pdf.  See 
PDF page numbers 27, 72, 138, 145, 158 and 165. 
 
As  a  result  of  this  recent  discovery  the  Coast  Guard  strongly 
recommends  that  vessel  owners  and  operators  inspect  their 
Type 1 unicellular plastic foam lifejackets for potential indications 
of failure or degradation, specifically:  
 

•  Compression:  The  lifejacket  may  be  compressed  from 

many years of stowage.  
 

•  Loss  of  resiliency:  The  lifejacket  is  excessively  hard,  stiff 
or  its  foam  is  brittle.  Normally  after  compressing  the 
lifejacket to about half its initial thickness, the foam should 
expand to its original dimension in a short period of time. 
 

•  Shrinkage:  A physical reduction in size may be indicated 
by “wrinkling”  of the coating on vinyl  dipped type or by a 
loose fitting shell on a fabric-covered lifejacket. 
 

•  Manufacturer: While the potential for problems applies to 
all  older  PFDs,  those  manufactured  by  “The  Safeguard 
Corporation” should be closely examined. 

Degraded Dust-like 

Unicellular Foam 

 
the  Coast  Guard 
This  Safety  Alert  was  developed  by 
Headquarters  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis  in 
conjunction  with  the  Inspections  Division  of  Coast  Guard  Sector 
Key West.  Any questions or comments should be sent to send to: HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil.  

Volume Shrinkage 

 

