  
  
  
  

  
October 6, 2017                                                                                                   Safety Alert 11-17 

  

Inspections and Compliance Directorate   

Washington, DC  

Remain Upright by Fully Understanding 

Vessel Stability  

finding 

  Although 

the  
various 
the  casualty. 

  
This Safety Alert addresses concerns related to 
vessel  stability  and  watertight 
integrity. 
Recently, a marine casualty involving a fishing 
vessel  in  the  Bering  Sea  resulted  in  multiple 
fatalities  and  complete  loss  of  the  vessel.    A 
Marine  Board  of  Investigation  is  currently 
circumstances 
analyzing  
surrounding 
the 
investigation  is  not  complete,  testimony  and 
fact 
that  vessel  owners, 
operators,  and  crews  should  give  special 
consideration to vessel stability concerns.   
  
The  need  for  operators  to  understand  their 
vessel’s Stability Instructions (SI) cannot be  
overstated.    It  is  important  to  understand  the 
document.  Operators and crew should seek out opportunities to further their knowledge of stability 
via courses, training, workshops, and visits from Naval Architects.  They should also take advantage 
of other various initiatives, both mandatory and voluntary, to discuss and compare a vessel’s current 
SI to the actual loaded condition prior to departing port.  An independent review of a vessel’s loaded 
condition, equipment, and operations can often provide important insights.  
  

indicate 

Operators can significantly reduce the risk of capsizing by performing the following actions:  

•  Routinely review and update vessel SI,  
•  Stay below the limits for vessel and cargo detailed in SI,  
•  Ensure SI reflect the vessel's current arrangement, equipment, and operations  

(lightship and loaded cargo/fishing gear conditions), and  

•  Follow good marine practice by re-assessing the SI every five years.  
 

Operators should confirm the accuracy of their SI whenever a vessel undergoes any of the following 
actions:  

•  Major conversions or substantial alterations (See 46 CFR 28.50 and 28.501, respectively),   
•  Changes to a vessel’s rigging, deck, or fishing equipment (including pots),   
•  Changes in principal dimensions, cargo hold, or tank capacities,   
•  Circumstances of weight creep (i.e., the accumulation of extra gear, equipment, and parts carried 

aboard the vessel), and  

•  Any other weight change variations which may occur.  

                                                                                                                                                                                            Page | 1   

Carry pots?  

•  Pay special attention to pot weights,  
•  Annually weigh a percentage of them to 
verify if the actual weight (including shots 
of line and buoys) matches that recorded 
in the SI,  

•  Weigh them wet  - soaked lines can add 

as much as 15 pounds per shot, and  

•  Consult  a  Naval  Architect  for  loading 
recommendations  and  amendments  if 
pots are heavier than what is listed in the 
SI.  

  
Icing makes a vessel dangerously unstable:  

•  Regulations for SI assume only 1.3 inches of accumulation on horizontal surfaces;  
•  Real life conditions easily and often exceed 1.3 inches of icing;  
•  Unless tested for a value over 1.3 inches a vessel’s capsizing and sinking risk increases when 

that value is exceeded on horizontal surfaces;  

•  A  vessel’s  center  of  gravity  can  rapidly 
rise  when  freezing  spray  accumulates 
high above the main deck;  

if 

to  determine 

•  Operators  should  use  all  available 
resources 
icing  and 
freezing  spray  is  forecasted  in  their 
operational  location  for  the  next  48-72 
hour time window;  
If  icing  conditions  are  forecasted  or 
present – operators should seek shelter, 
reduce  speed,  change  course,  and 
manually remove ice;  
If forecasted prior departure, operators should consider reducing the amount of bait, gear, and 
pots. 

• 

• 

  
Operators should perform the following actions to maintain watertight integrity:  

•  Follow SI associated with watertight doors (WTDs) and hatches,  
•  Frequently train and inform crew to habitually close watertight doors and hatches at sea,  
•  Label WTDs to be closed,  
•  Keep hatches closed to the greatest extent possible, and  
•  Practice closing WTDs that are routinely permitted to be open during emergency drills.  

  

  

Important vessel stability training hyperlinks:  
   
Fishsafewest.info:      Online Stability Training  
CG-CVC-3:                    Stability Guide                          
                                   Stability Card 
                                       Sample Stability Guide 
                                       Stability Modification Sample  
  

is  provided  for 

This  safety  alert 
informational 
purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational,  or  material 
requirements.  Developed by a Coast Guard Marine 
Board  of  Investigation  in  conjunction  with  Coast 
Guard  District  13  and  17  Prevention  Divisions.  
Questions  may  be  sent 
INV@uscg.mil.  
    

to  HQS-PF-fldr-CG-

                                                                                                                                                                                         Page | 2   

