 

                      

 

 
 
 
December 4, 2008   
Washington, DC 
 
VENTILATION CLOSURES FOR FIXED GAS FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS ON 

Alert 13-08 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SMALL PASSENGER VESSELS 

 

This Safety Alert addresses the importance of ensuring proper operation and adequacy of ventilation 
closure  devices  for  spaces  protected  by  fixed  gas  fire  extinguishing  systems  on  small  passenger 
vessels.  Properly  operating  ventilation  closures  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  vessel  firefighting 
systems and minimize the spread of fire to other areas of the vessel. 

Recent  vessel  casualty  investigations  conducted  by  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  and  the  National 
Transportation  Safety  Board  (NTSB)  into  fires  aboard  small  passenger  vessels  have  raised 
awareness for the need to properly inspect and test ventilation closures for spaces protected by fixed 
gas fire extinguishing systems.   
 
Federal Regulations require provisions for closing all supply duct cowls or scoops and exhaust duct 
discharge openings in spaces protected by fixed gas extinguishing systems.  All closure devices must 
be  readily  available  and  mounted  in  the  vicinity  of  the  vent.    As  part  of  each  annual  inspection, 
attending marine inspectors should ensure the adequacy and serviceability of these closure devices 
in  accordance  with  the  CG  840  inspection  guide.    While  observing  fire  drills  in  spaces  covered  by 
fixed gas systems, marine inspectors should ensure the vessel crews are familiar with these devices 
and ensure they are utilized properly during the conduct of the drill.   
 
Small passenger vessels built on or after March 11, 1996 and small passenger vessels constructed of 
wood or fiber reinforced plastic (FRP) must have approved fixed fire extinguishing systems in certain 
machinery,  fuel  tank,  and  storage  spaces  which  are  described  in  46  CFR  181.400  and  46  CFR 
118.400.  Vessels of other than wood or FRP construction built prior to March 11, 1996 must have a 
fixed system in machinery and fuel tank spaces using gasoline or other fuels having a flash point of 
110° F or lower, paint and oil rooms, and cargo spaces which are inaccessible during a voyage  and 
used for combustible cargo. 
 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owners  and  operators,  as  well  as  marine 
inspectors, ensure the adequacy and test the operation of all ventilation closures for spaces protected 
by  a  fixed  fire  extinguishing  system  including  both  manual  and  automatic  devices.    Automatic 
closures  should  be  tested  and  serviced  by  a  qualified  servicing  facility  in  conjunction  with  the 
servicing of the fixed fire extinguishing system.   

The regulations governing ventilation closures for spaces protected by a fixed gas fire extinguishing 
systems  are  contained  46  CFR  Parts  182.465(h)  and  119.465(h).    These  regulations  are  available 
through  the  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO)  and  may  be  downloaded  without  cost  from  the 
GPO’s  internet  website  http://www.gpoaccess.gov/index.html.  A  fixed  gas  fire  extinguishing  system 
installed  but  not  required  by  regulation  must  still  function  properly  including  the  operation  of 
ventilation closure devices. 
 

1

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Office of Vessel Activities, 
Domestic  Compliance  Division  (CG-5431),  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington, 
DC.    Questions  should  be  directed  to  Lieutenant  Commander  David  Webb  at  (202)  372-1216  or 
David.M.Webb@uscg.mil.   
                                                                         
                                                                                  *******  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distributed by: Office of Investigations and Analysis – http://marineinvestigations.us 
To Subscribe: Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

 

2

