September 8, 2015 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 9-15 
 

 

ANYONE CAN STEER A BOAT 

But your employees and customers deserve more! 

 

transit.  Witnesses 

Southbound Vessel  

This Safety Alert serves as a reminder to owners and operators of pollution response vessels and 
other  types  of  special  purpose  vessels  of  the  need  to  employ  knowledgeable  operators  with 
appropriate  seamanship  skills  to  navigate  their  vessels.    It  emphasizes  the  responsibilities  of 
owners  and  operators  to  ensure  a  safe  working  environment  for  employees  and  passengers 
irrespective  of  the  absence  of  applicable  federal  regulations  regarding  the  need  for  vessel 
inspections or credentialed mariners. 
 
Recently  on  the  Lower  Mississippi  River  two  pollution 
response  vessels  collided  while  traveling  in  opposite 
directions  at  speeds  of  approximately  30  and  40  mph 
respectively.    Onboard  the  northbound  30-foot  vessel 
was  an  operator  and  17  other  persons  from  pollution 
response  organizations.  The  operator  was  not  a 
licensed  mariner  and  was  not  familiar  with  the  Inland 
Rules  of  the  Road.    Onboard  the  southbound  36-foot 
vessel,  were  two  persons,  an  operator  possessing  a 
license  and  another  employee.    Neither  operator  was 
using  their  radar  equipment  or  posted  a  lookout  during 
the 
the  evening 
southbound  vessel  did  not  have 
lights 
illuminated  and  it  was  determined  that  the  northbound 
operator had never taken a formal boating safety course. 
 
As the vessels approached each other, the southbound 
vessel  operator  noticed 
light  of  an 
oncoming  vessel  and  turned  towards  starboard  in 
accordance  with  the  Rules  of  the  Road,  while  the 
northbound  vessel  saw  just  a  black  silhouette  and 
turned towards port.  A few moments later, the vessels 
collided  as  the  northbound  vessel’s  starboard  bow 
corner struck the southbound vessel’s square front bow.  
 
As  a  result,  both  vessels  sustained  moderate  damage 
and  15  people  were  hurt  including  multiple  head,  neck, 
and  back  injuries  that  required  on-scene  triage  and 
emergency  transport  to  local  hospitals.    The  incident 
could  have  been  much  worse  as  accident  investigators 
noted  that  there  would  likely  have  been  numerous 
fatalities if the angle of impact been slightly different.  

Northbound Vessel 

the  red  bow 

its  bow 

reported 

that 

1 

Safety Alert 8-15 

 

 
 
Both operators contributed to the collision by not understanding or adhering to the Inland Rules of 
the Road. 
 
As  a  result  of  this  casualty  the  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  all  pollution  response 
companies and other industries that operate special purpose vessels without licensed or credential 
mariners do the following: 
 

  Develop policies and hiring prerequisites that require all boat operators to attend a formal 

boating safety course which includes basic Inland Rules of the Road. 
 

  Critically examine boat operations to determine if sufficient attention has been given to the 

safety of company employees and other personnel who are transported or work onboard 
their vessels. 

 
This safety alert is provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Special  thanks  to  the  Investigations 
Office of Sector New Orleans and the Eighth Coast Guard District Inspections and Investigations 
Branch.      Developed  and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis, 
Washington DC.  Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

2 

