 
 
 
 
 
 
May 27, 2010 
Washington, DC  

AIS TEXT MESSAGING CONCERNS: 

 USAGE DURING NAVIGATION AND EMERGENCIES 

AND ENSURING ACCURATE AIS DATA 

                           Alert 05-10 

Automatic Identification System (AIS) is an internationally adopted radio-navigation protocol to exchange 
pertinent navigation-related information amongst its users, either afloat, ashore or airborne. AIS facilitates 
vessel 
for  voice  radiotelephone 
transmissions.  AIS  provide  vessel  information,  including  the  vessel's  identity,  type,  position,  course, 
speed, navigational status and other safety-related information. It receives automatically such information 
from similarly fitted ships; monitors and tracks ships; and exchanges data with shore-based facilities.   

traffic  management  while  simultaneously  reducing 

the  need 

Usage During Navigation - AIS enhances user’s situational awareness, and can mitigate risk of collision 
by providing vessels with more reliable information upon which to base their passing arrangements. This 
can be accomplished via an AIS safety related text message of up to 156 characters long. However, the 
Coast Guard strongly reminds operators that use of AIS text messaging does not relieve the vessel of 
other  requirements,  such  as  the  Vessel  Bridge-to-Bridge  Radiotelephone  regulations  or  of  the 
requirements to sound whistle signals and display lights or shapes in accordance with the International or 
Inland Navigation Rules.  

Usage  During  Emergencies  -  With  respect  to  using  AIS  safety  related  text  messages  in  emergency 
situations, users must be aware that they may not be received, recognized or acted upon as Global 
Maritime  Distress  Safety  Systems  (GMDSS)  messages  would  be  by  the  Coast  Guard,  other  competent 
authorities  or  maritime  first  responders.  Thus  AIS  must  not  be  relied  upon  as  the  primary  means  for 
broadcasting  distress  or  urgent  communications,  nor  used  in  lieu  of  GMDSS  such  as  Digital  Selective 
Calling radios which are designed to process distress messaging. Nonetheless, AIS remains an effective 
means to augment GMDSS and provides the added benefit of being ‘seen’ (on radar or chart displays), in 
addition to being ‘heard’ (via text messaging) by other AIS users within VHF radio range.  

Operators Must Ensure Accurate Data -The Coast Guard has noted a high percentage of inaccurate and 
improper  AIS  messaging  data.  AIS  requires  operators  to  routinely  update  their  data  as  it  relates  to 
navigation  status,  draft,  origination  and  destination  ports,  and  eta.  Other  pertinent  static  data  is  to  be 
maintained  accurately.    Dynamic  Data,  such  as  that  from  positioning  sources  like  GPS  via  external 
sensors  must 
See 
http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/enav/ais/USA_AIS_Data_Entry_Guidance_v5.pdf  for  additional  details.  AIS 
is only as good as the information provided and exchanged, therefore, users must ensure their unit is 
always in effective operating condition and broadcasting accurate  information. 

continuously 

operational, 

updated. 

accurate 

always 

and 

be 

safety, 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international 
visit 
www.navcen.uscg.gov/enav/ais/AISFAQ.htm  for  further  information  on  AIS  or  on  how  to  program  and 
properly  use  AIS  messaging.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Waterways  Management,  U.  S.  Coast  Guard 
Headquarters, Washington, D.C., cgnav@uscg.mil.  
 

requirement. 

operational 

material 

Please 

or 

Office of Investigations and Analysis: http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

**** 

