  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 23, 2004 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

CONFINED SPACE ENTRY 

      Safety Alert 02-04 
 

Last Fall a foreign flagged containership during a coastwise voyage reported upon leaving port that 
the vessel’s second engineer was missing. Despite an extensive search by the vessel’s crew and 
officers, the individual was presumed to have gone ashore and missed the sailing. Upon arrival at 
the following port the individual was found deceased behind an access door to the main propulsion 
engine’s scavenging air receiver.  

The vessel was powered by a Burmeister & Wain, 9 cylinder two stroke engine that develops over 
fifty-five  thousand  horsepower.  The  engine’s  scavenging  air  space  can  be  accessed  by  two 
manholes located on both ends of the scavenging air receiver.  

These  circular  manholes  are  secured  by 
three  L-shaped  dogs  having  an  outer 
edge  that  is  tightened  against  an  inner 
circumferential  lip  on  the  edge  of  the 
access  hole.  Tightening  is  achieved  by 
the use a handled fastener. 
 

Coast  Guard  investigators  determined 
that the engineer entered the scavenging 
air  receiver  alone.  Although  his  reason 
for  entering  the  receiver  is  not  known, 

maintenance 

engine 
was 
performed in that space while at 
the  first  port  and  he  may  have 
returned  to  inspect  the  area  for 
left behind tools and materials or 
to retrieve something. It appears 
that  after  his  entry,  the  easily 
moved  hinged  /  inward-opening 
door 
closed. 
Investigators  believe  that  at  that 
time, the upper left dog due to its 
weight and perhaps the vibration 
of the door as it closed, caused the dog to move allowing its edge to catch the circumferential lip at 
the  opening.  Once  caught,  even  with  the  loosened  fastener  the  door  could  no  longer  be  opened 
from the inside of the receiver. 

accidentally 

1 

The second engineer was an experienced mariner. It was reported that he was trained and familiar 
with  the  vessel's  confined  space  entry  procedure.  In  all  previous  instances,  he  followed  the 
procedures  and  safely  performed  maintenance  inside  the  space.  Unfortunately,  on  this  occasion 
he  entered  without  informing  anyone  or  having  an  assistant  stationed  outside.  Despite  various 
searches  by  the  crew  within  the  machinery  spaces  and  the  main  engine  while  the  vessel  was 
preparing to sail, he went unnoticed. 

Mariners may on occasion not associate certain work areas as confined spaces and therefore not 
take  the  precautionary  steps  needed.  Main  engine  crankcases,  scavenging  air  spaces,  exhaust 
ducting, boiler drums, furnaces, stack casings, condensers, sewage plant tanks and other systems, 
equipment, and components may present potential “confined space" type hazards. 

A confined space may be defined as any location that, by design, has limited openings for entry or 
egress and is not intended for continuous human occupancy. This definition applies regardless of 
whether  or  not  the  atmosphere  is  explosive  or  toxic.  See  related  US  Department  of  Labor, 
Occupational Safety & Health Administration information by clicking here.  

In this casualty, there was initially sufficient quantities of oxygen for the second engineer to breath, 
at least until the engine started causing the ambient environmental conditions inside the receiver to 
change dramatically and cause the fatality. 

The Coast Guard strongly recommends that:  

•  All vessels complying with the International Safety Management Code (ISM) have a specific 

plan for entering confined spaces outlined within their Safety Management System.  

•  The confined space entry procedures include and identify various types of shipboard spaces 
such as those previously mentioned that could be encountered and which should be treated 
as confined spaces.  

•  Crew safety meetings address the identification of confined spaces and provide instruction 

• 

on confined space entry procedures.  
Individual crewmembers that work in confined spaces review existing entry procedures and 
requirements regularly.  

•  All other vessels and maritime operations falling outside of ISM requirements develop and 
include  in  their  marine  safety  programs  similar  confined  space  identification  and  entry 
procedures.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

 

2 

