 
 
 
 
 
December 18, 2009                                                                                                               Alert 09-09 
Washington, DC 

 
 

NAVIGATION LIGHTS - “MAINTAINING DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER” 

 
 
The Coast Guard recognizes that many vessel owners choose to place of decorative lights onboard 
their vessels during the Holiday season.  The Coast Guard strongly reminds vessel owners not to 
illuminate such lights during routine navigation unless operating in a Holiday boat parade or when the 
vessel is secured dockside.  This issue was highlighted during a recent casualty whereby the owner 
of  a  passenger  vessel  had  installed  decorative  Holiday  type  LED  (Light  Emitting  Diode)  lighting 
around the periphery of the vessel.  The LEDs were contained in a clear flexible hose and securely 
attached.  Near  the  bow  of  the  vessel  the  lighting  was  adjacent  and  slightly  above  the  port  and 
starboard  navigation  lights.    At  night  this  installation,  can  impair  the  “distinctive  character”  of  the 
navigation lights as set out in  Rule 20 of the Navigation Rules.  (Photograph below shows daytime 
view.) 
 
 
Additionally,  Rule  22  of  Navigation  Rules  states 
that  vessel  sidelights  have  a  two  mile  range  for 
vessels 12 meters or more in length but less than 
50  meters  in  length.    In  this  particular  casualty  a 
side light navigation fixture was found installed on 
the passenger vessel that was stamped 1 nautical 
mile vice two miles. Vessel owners and operators 
and  marine  inspection  personnel  should  ensure 
that  the  proper  navigation  lighting  fixtures  are 
installed,  that  all  components  operate  correctly 
and  that  regulatory  requirements  with  respect  to 
Navigation Lighting are met. 
 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  This information does not assign culpability  
of  any  kind,  to  any  involved  party  with  respect  to  the  aforementioned  casualty.    Developed  by  the 
Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard  Headquarters,  Washington,  DC.  
Questions can be addressed to Mr. Ken Olsen at: 
 
 
  
                                                                     Office of Investigations and Analysis: 

    Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil. 

 

 

 

 

 

http://marineinvestigations.us 

    To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

