 
 
 
 
 
September 19, 2008                                                                                                                 Alert 7-08 
Washington, DC  

DANGER ALOFT 

 
The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  encourages  that  operators  of  vessels  establish  clear  written 
guidelines  and  procedures  for  working  aloft,  require  the  use  of  safety  harnesses,  discourage  and 
prohibit “rites of passage” such as described below.  Going aloft to any height on any type of vessel is 
very serious and dangerous business, can be deadly and leaves no room for acts of daring or joking 
around! 
 
We’re  sadly  reminded  of  that  fact  by  the  death  of  an  18  year  old  crewmember  onboard  a  New 
England sailing vessel.  This tall ship had embarked a group of students and set out for a beautiful 
day of sailing.  About an hour into the cruise a crewmember slipped from the rigging and plummeted 
about 30 feet to the deck below sustaining terrible injury that resulted in his death.   
 
Evidence  in  the  casualty  investigation  indicated  that  this  young  man  went  aloft  without  permission, 
was unsupervised and alone and was participating in an informal rite of passage referred to in the tall 
ship community as “laying across the spring stay.”  This involves crossing from one mast to another 
while hanging by your hands and feet on a wire called a “spring stay.” 
 
The  resultant  Coast  Guard  casualty  investigation  concluded  in  part  that,  "The  practice  of  laying 
across  the  spring  stay  is  an  extremely  dangerous  and  unnecessary  evolution,  especially  while  the 
vessel is underway, and without a safety harness. Although crewmembers were not directed to use 
the  spring  stay,  it  appears  the  practice  was  not  discouraged  and  was  considered  by  some 
crewmembers as a daring accomplishment or rite of passage."   
 
Further, the investigation concluded that: 
 

•  The policies regarding crew training for going aloft in the rigging onboard the vessel appeared 
to be “unstructured and loosely defined” relying primarily upon on-the-job type training with no 
written guidelines or procedures.  

 

•  The crewmember was not wearing any type of safety harness.  This piece of safety equipment 
was neither required by regulation or by company policy and was not onboard the vessel at the 
time of the casualty. 

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed by the Office of 
Investigations and Analysis, United States Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC.   

Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

******* 

