  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 1998 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 08-98 
 

SAFETY IS PROPER COMMUNICATION 

 

 
Parents,  the  media,  government,  military,  industry,  schools,  ad  infinitum,  regularly  alert  us  to 
hazards  associated  with  unsafe  practices.  Why  then  do  so  many  preventable  accidents  occur 
every  year?  Is  it  just  human  nature  to  take  unnecessary  risks  or  is  it  a  breakdown  in  proper 
communication? Most likely it is a combination of both.  

There  are  those  few  unfortunate  people  who  refuse  to  listen  to  anything  concerning  their  well-
being. They recklessly race through life until one day the odds catch up with them and they end 
up  as  accident  statistics.  Too  often  innocent  bystanders  are  killed  or  injured  because  of  these 
people.  

Thankfully, the great majority are safety conscious and make every attempt to follow the rules and 
regulations  of  the  activity  in  which  they  are  participating.  However,  it  is  sad  to  note  that,  on 
occasion,  even  these  people  lower  their  safety  guard  and  take  chances  which  lead  to  mishaps. 
How  can  they  be  persuaded  not  to  throw  caution  to  the  wind?  Through  proper  communication, 
that's how.  

There are few people who never have the opportunity to counsel others on the safest and most 
efficient way to accomplish a given task. It's during these direct confrontations with individuals and 
groups that the right words must be used. This ensures that those listening understand what was 
said and if called upon to perform a related task, they would know how to do it.  

When  dealing  with  safety,  everyone  must  be  a  leader.  Whatever  your  position,  if  you  see 
someone doing something in a unsafe manner, call it to his or her attention. Actually, you're doing 
them a favor.  

When  you  show  someone  how  to  do  a  job,  make  sure  they  fully  understand  you.  By  the  same 
token, when you're learning a certain task, make sure you fully understand the procedures.  

This is what it's all about. This is proper communication. This is safety.  

This safety alert is provided for informational purpose only and does not relieve any domestic or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

 

 

1 

