  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 16, 1998 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

WIRE ROPE FAILURES 

      Safety Alert 02-98 
 

The  starboard  lifeboat  aboard  a  large  freighter  was  lowered  to  facilitate  securing  the  gear  and 
stores in the boat. At approximately 9:40 a.m., stowage was completed and the boat was ready to 
be  raised  up  to  its  inboard  stowed  position.  Three  men  remained  in  the  boat  as  it  was  being 
hoisted.  The  floating  blocks  connected  with  the  davit  arms  and  the  davit  arms  started  up  the 
trackways.  The  davit  arms  were  23  inches  up  the  trackways  when,  without  warning,  the  forward 
lifeboat fall parted with a loud snap. All the men in the lifeboat were immediately dropped into the 
water as the boat swung, still being held by the after fall, against the after davit arm. Cause of the 
accident:  Localized  corrosion  which  caused  thinning  of  the  wires  and  thus  the  weakening  of  the 
strands. Failure occurred when the corrosion-reduced cross section was overloaded. Injuries: One 
man received a cervical sprain; another incurred a serious back injury, which caused considerable 
lost work time; the last man had his right ear drum perforated.  

This  accident  description  is,  unfortunately,  not  unique.  It  is  typical  of  a  kind  of  accident  which  is 
repeated so often that even the casual observer cannot help but wonder at the mariner's failure to 
heed the safety measures which have been established to prevent such recurring accidents.  

Standards and procedures for the care and maintenance of wire rope falls on lifeboat davits have 
long  been  established  by  both  manufacturers  and  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard;  yet  each  year  serious 
injuries to personnel and property damage are caused by the failure of wire rope falls.  

These failures have two things in common: their cause, and the opportunity for their prevention. In 
nearly every case, such accidents are caused by the separation of the falls at a point which was 
inaccessible  for  proper  maintenance  and  inspection  when  the  davit  was  in  a  full  upright  stowed 
position.  In  nearly  every  case,  the  accidents  could  have  been  prevented  had  the  davits  been 
partially  lowered  to  allow  access  to  the  entire  length  of  the  fall  line  for  proper  lubrication  and 
inspection.  

Wire  rope,  like  complicated  machinery,  consists  of  many  small  interwoven  parts  that  need 
lubrication. There isn't a mariner worth his salt who wouldn't acknowledge the necessity to keep an 
engine  or  winch  well  lubricated  to  achieve  best  results.  Yet  many  of  these  knowledgeable 
seafarers ignore the necessity of keeping wire rope clean and well lubricated.  

Most davits on shipboard are located so that they are continuously exposed to both sea spray and 
stack gas. The combination of salt water and engine or boiler exhausts creates acids which pit and 
corrode  wire  rope,  providing  bending  and  fatigue  points  which  eventually  lead  to  failures.  This 
weakening can be prevented by proper cleaning and lubrication. In most cases investigated, this 
wear  at  stress  points  around  sheaves  and  through  blocks  would  have  been  visible  to  the  naked 
eye had the entire length of the fall been examined by the lowering of the davit. Lowering the davit 
would have allowed access to those areas of the fall line which are normally inaccessible.  

1 

Another  factor  contributing  to  failures:  the  failure  of  crew  members  to  periodically  change  the 
position  of  wire  rope,  allowing  a  piece  of  wire  rope  to  remain  in  a  single  use  position  for  the 
expected life of the rope. A ship is subjected to considerable vibration while at sea. This vibration is 
arrested sharply at the tangent point in the sheaves creating areas of potential fatigue failure. If the 
position of the rope is periodically changed by moving the boom position, the wear and fatigue is 
distributed more evenly along the length of the rope, thus reducing the chance of failure.  

Modern  wire  rope  is  made  to  the  highest  engineering  standards.  By  the  use  of  many  tests  and 
controls  during  its  manufacture,  it  is  almost  impossible  for  serious  flaws  to  exist  in  the  finished 
product.  An  accident  in  service  with  wire  rope  almost  always  results  from  poor  maintenance 
procedures.  To  keep  wire  ropes  in  safe  operating  condition,  clean  and  lubricate  them  frequently, 
and regularly change their stowage position.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil 

 

 

2 

