 
           

 
May 12, 2014 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

 

   Alert 05-14 

OVERHEATING OF PARASAIL VESSEL HYDRAULIC OIL SYSTEM 

LEAVES PARASAILORS ALOFT FOR THREE HOURS 

 
The  information  in  this  safety  alert  is  derived  from  a  recent  parasail  casualty  investigation.    Two 
passengers  were  successfully  launched  from  a  parasail  vessel  for  a  ride  aloft.   As  they  were  being 
winched  in  the  winds  picked  up.  The  parasail  towline  winch  became  inoperable  and  800  feet  of 
towline payed out stranding  the passengers aloft.  Additionally, the vessel was unable to make way 
through the water while battling rough seas and the strong winds.   
 
The  cause  of  the  winch  malfunction  was  due  to  overheating  of  the  hydraulic  power  system.  This 
occurred because of an inadequate oil cooling system (through hull fittings / scoop type system) that 
relied  solely  on  the  vessel's  movement  through  the  water.  When  the  vessel's  movement  was 
overcome  and  stalled  by  the  wind  acting  against  the  parasail  and  the  waves,  there  was  no  water 
circulation  and  thus  no  resultant  cooling  of  the  hydraulic  oil.    Since  there  was  no  fail  safe  braking 
system, the towline payed out when the hydraulic motor could no longer develop power.  Three hours 
passed before the winds subsided enough to allow forward movement of the vessel, cooling off of the 
oil, and restoring the system to operation. 
 
This  event  was  fortunate  in  that  the  parasail  towline  did  not  break  and  there  were  no  fatalities  or 
injuries.  Nevertheless, to prevent similar occurrences, the Coast Guard strongly recommends that 
insurers, owners and operators of parasail vessels: 
 

•  Ensure  their  vessel’s  parasail  winch  hydraulic  oil  cooling  systems  are  not  dependent  on 
forward movement of the vessel. If necessary, have the system modified by a parasail vessel 
professional. 
 

•  Owners of parasail vessels which do have pressurized hydraulic oil cooling systems should 
ensure that their systems are properly fitted with inlet strainers on the sea water supply and 
that the rest of the system, pumps, motors, controls, oil filters, etc. are properly maintained 
at the proper frequency. 

•  Review the attached previously sent “Know Your Ropes” safety alert and remember: 

You set the stage for passenger safety! 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis.  For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
July  22,  2013             
Washington, DC                                     Parasailing Operations 

       

     

     

     

     

   

   

Know Your ROPES 

 

        Assistant Commandant for Prevention Policy 

       

     

     

    Alert  07-13 

A series of parasail incidents resulting in fatalities and injuries have occurred over the last few years.  
Since  2006,  there  have  been  11  deaths  and  52  injuries  as  a  result  of  parasailing  activities.    There 
have  been  several  common  factors  in  all  of  these  incidents  that  are  unique  to  parasailing.  The 
following  mnemonic  ‘Know  Your  ROPES’  was  designed  to  remind  parasail  operators  of  important 
safety issues that may help prevent future casualties: 
Remember that most parasail fatalities and injuries are related to the failure of the towline.  Failures 
have occurred at tensions significantly below the rated towline strengths due to a variety of reasons 
that may include cyclic loading, long term exposure to environmental elements, the presence of knots 
creating a weak point, and overloading. 
Observe  and  monitor  weather  conditions  continuously.  Increases  in  wind  speed  impacts  the 
relative speed against the chute, where limits of the towline and/or chute can quickly be exceeded. As 
wind  speed  doubles,  the  load  on  the  towline  may  quadruple.    Be  vigilant  in  monitoring  weather 
conditions noting the formation of squalls, thunderstorms, or whenever weather fronts are expected to 
pass  through  your  operational  area.    Cease  operations  well  before  such  weather  conditions  impact 
your  parasailing  operation.    ASTM  Standard  F2993-13  published  on  April  1,  2013  is  a  ‘Standard 
Guide  for  Monitoring  Weather  Conditions  for  Safe  Parasail  Operation’.    It  is  available  for  purchase 
and download on line at http://www.astm.org/. 
Prepare for emergencies by having  well  documented procedures and conducting crew training to 
ensure  proficiency  in  responding  to  emergencies  such  as  towline  breaks,  winch  failures,  propulsion 
failures, and any other concerns that impact crew/passenger safety.   
Ensure  that  all  of  your  equipment  is  properly  maintained  on  a  continual  basis.    This  includes  the 
winch and drive motor, hydraulic brakes, hoses and piping, spooling systems, and other tackle.  Also 
check  your  chutes,  harnesses,  and  related  components  for  stitching  failures,  degradation,  and  the 
need for general repairs. Immediately correct identified problems. 
Safety is up to you the Operator.  Coast Guard Credentialed Operators are expected to provide an 
adequate level of safety during vessel operations, to include the monitoring of weather conditions and 
maintenance of equipment. 
 
 
The  Coast  Guard  encourages  owners  and  operators  to  work  with  each  other  and  related  industry 
associations  to  share  best  practices  and  develop  operational  standards  to  maximize  safety  and 
prevent marine casualties.  Enforcement action may be taken against the operator for misconduct or 
negligent operation. 
 
This  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  requirement.    Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  USCG 
Headquarters, Washington, DC. 

Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Analysis:  Http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:  Kenneth.W.Olsen@uscg.mil 

Know Your ROPES 

Your towline! Most accidents are related to the failure of 
the tow line.  Remember to continuously assess your line. 

Weather!  Increased winds and other weather conditions 
can significantly impact your operations.  Cease operations 
well in advance! See ASTM ‘Weather’ Standard F2993-13. 

Be ready for any emergency. Have well documented proce-
dures and conduct crew training frequently. 

Ensure your equipment is properly maintained. Immedi-
ately correct any problems. 

Safety is up to you...the Operator!  Do everything you can 
to ensure the safety of your passengers. 

