 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 12, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 13-16 

WE’RE NOT INFLATING THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS MESSAGE 
CHECK FOR PROBLEMS BEFORE YOUR LIFE DEPENDS ON IT!  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This  safety  alert  reminds  all  inflatable  life  jacket  users  of  the  importance  of 
performing  periodic  maintenance  on  their  equipment.    Instances  of  fatal 
accidents  where  inflatable  life  jackets  failed  to  properly  inflate  have  been 
documented.    When  a  life  jacket  fails  to  inflate  properly,  the  results  can  be  life 
threatening.    Unknown  bladder  leaks  may  exist,  fabric  degradation  or  an 
improperly  installed  CO2  cylinder  is  all  it  takes  to  render  an  inflatable  life  jacket 
ineffective by preventing its inflation or ability to stay inflated. 

inflatable  equipment  will 

likely  have  different 
Various  manufacturers  of 
maintenance instructions for their products and directions for the user to service 
and inspect the devices.  Knowing and following the manufacturer’s maintenance 
instructions  are  critical.    Proper  maintenance  service  and  inspection  will  ensure 
all  parts  of  the  life  jacket  including  the  bladder,  inflation  mechanism  and  CO2 
cylinder are checked and in good working order.  
 
The  Coast  Guard  highly  recommends  routine  maintenance,  service,  and 
inspection in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.  

The  following  inflatable  life  jacket  inspection  guidance  is  for  informational 
purposes  only  and  does  not  supersede  any  manufacturer  recommendations  or 
instruction: 

1)  Each voyage, prior to getting underway:  

a. 

If there is a service indicator check it to ensure it is GREEN.  If the service indicator is RED the mechanism 
has been fired or is incorrectly fitted. 

b.  Check for visible signs of wear or damage by ensuring that there are no rips, tears or holes; that the seams 

are securely sewn; and that the fabric, straps and hardware are still strong. 

c.  For auto-inflating life jackets, ensure all auto components are armed and not expired.  Following the 

manufacturer’s instructions, reveal the inflation system and oral inflation tube.  Check that the CO2 cylinder is 
firmly secured.  Examine it for rust or corrosion.  If you remove the CO2 cylinder for inspection, be sure to 
carefully replace it without over-tightening. 

d.  Repack the lifejacket as per manufacturer’s instructions. Ensure the pull-tab lanyard is accessible and unlikely 

to be caught when being worn. 

2)  Periodic checks as recommended by the manufacturer or when in doubt: 

a. 

Inflate  the  bladder  using  the  oral  tube  and  leave  it  overnight  in  a  room  with  a  constant  temperature.  If  the 
bladder loses pressure, take the lifejacket to an authorized service center for further tests.  Do not attempt to 
repair a life jacket yourself.  If there is no obvious loss of pressure, deflate the life jacket by turning the cap of 
the inflation tube upside down and pressing it into the inflation tube.  Gently squeeze the inflatable life jacket 
until all air has been expelled.  To avoid damage do not wring or twist the life jacket.  

b.  Repack  the  lifejacket  as  per  manufacturer’s  instructions.    Ensure  the  pull-tab  lanyard  is  accessible  and 

unlikely to be inadvertently snagged when being worn. 

Store  your  life  jacket  in  a dry,  well  ventilated  location  away  from dampness and  out  of direct  sunlight.    It’s  important  to 
rinse your life jacket with fresh water after salt water exposure and dry it thoroughly prior to storage.  If your life jacket is 
set for auto-inflation, remove the auto-inflation cartridge prior to rinsing.  The life jacket manufacturer may have specific 
requirements, so read the instructions on the lifejacket.   

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  international  safety, 
operational,  or  material  requirements.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Auxiliary  and  Boating  Safety  and  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Casualty Analysis.  Questions or comments may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

 

 

 

******* 

