November 4, 2015 
Washington, DC 

Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 Safety Alert 10-15 

NAVIGATION LIGHTS 

The rules are for your safety! 

The  U.S.  Coast  Guard  is  concerned  about  the  sale  and 
availability  of  unapproved  recreational  and  commercial 
vessel  navigation  lights.    Purchasers  of  such  lighting 
should be aware replacement lighting may be improper for 
its  application  due  to  the  failure  by  manufacturers  to  meet 
technical certification requirements.  Furthermore, technical 
advances  in  marine  lighting,  such  as  the  use  of  Light 
Emitting  Diodes  (LEDs),  rope  lighting,  underwater  lighting, 
and  other  various  types  of  decorative  lighting,  may  violate 
navigation  light  provisions  of  the  Nautical  Rules  of  the 
Road.  

LEDs under rub rail surrounding vessel. 

The requirements for all navigation lights aboard vessels are prescribed in Rules 20, 21, 22 and Annex I of 
the “Rules of the Road,” which is the Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions 
at Sea (72  COLREGS) or the Inland Navigation Rules (33 CFR Subchapter E).  

Specifications for lights vary depending upon the type of vessel but regardless of the light source (i.e., in-
candescent filament or LED): 

 Recreational  vessel  and  uninspected  commercial  vessel  navigation  lights  must  meet  American
Boat  &  Yacht  Council  (ABYC)  standard  A-16,  in  accordance  with  specifications  within  33  CFR
183.810 and 46 CFR 25.10-3, respectively.

 Commercial inspected vessels must be outfitted with navigation lights that meet or exceed Under-

writers Laboratories standard UL 1104, as stated in the specifications of 46 CFR 111.75 -17.

Some  manufacturers  are  producing  and  distributing  navigation  lights  that  do  not  meet  the  certification 
requirements  indicated  above.    These  lights  are  typically  less  expensive,  making  them  a  tempting 
choice  for  uninformed  consumers.    Use  of  lights  that  do  not  provide  the  proper  chromaticity,  luminous 
intensity,  or  cut-off  angles  could  result  in  the  issuance  of  a  notice  of  violation  or  potentially  cause  an 
accident.    Recreational  boaters  should  ensure  each  purchased  navigation  light  contains  the  following 
information on the light or its packaging: 

USCG Approval 33 CFR 183.810 
MEETS ABYC A-16 or equivalent 
TESTED BY (an approved laboratory) 
Name of the light manufacturer  
Number of Model  
Visibility of the light in nautical miles  
Date on which the light was type-tested  
Identification and specification of the bulb used in the compliance test. 

SAFETY ALERT 10-15 

LEDs under rub rail surrounding vessel. 

lighting  on 

their  boats 

Boaters  should  be  concerned  about  installing  “decora-
tive” 
in  various  places,   
including  underwater,  on  the  rubrail,  or  just  above  the  
waterline.  Care must be taken that these lights:  
  cannot be mistaken for navigation lights,  
  do not impair the visibility or distinctive character 
of  approved  and  properly  placed  navigation 
lights, and  

  do  not  interfere  with  the  operator’s  ability  to 
maintain a proper lookout.  Such circumstances 
may represent a violation of Rule 20. 

 
Rule 20 specifies that only those lights prescribed, or those that don’t interfere with those prescribed, may 
be  used.  Haphazard  installation  of  additional  lighting  must  be  avoided.    A  violation  can  occur  if  the  
installation of additional lights can be construed as a light required by the Rules for another vessel.  For 
instance, blue underwater LED lights can appear to be flashing if there is any wave action, giving the ap-
pearance of a flashing blue light only authorized to be used by law enforcement vessels per 33 CFR 88.05. 

for  a  vessel  with 

 
Rule  21  provides  the  definitions  for  the  masthead 
light,  sidelights,  sternlight,  towing  light,  all-round 
lights  or  task  lights,  and  flashing  or special  flashing 
lights.    Task  lights  are  those  lights  which  place  the 
vessel in a special condition (e.g., all-round red over 
white  over 
restricted  
red 
maneuverability).  
 
Rule  22  provides  for  the  intensity  requirements  of 
each light, per vessel size, so that they may be seen 
at a minimum range. 
 
Annex I of the Rules, specifies the vertical and hori-
zontal spacing of each of the required lights both in 
relation  to  the  vessel  hull  and  with  respect  to  other 
navigation lights.  Compliance with the provisions of 
Annex I ensures the light is properly mounted for its intended purpose.  The proper installation of any light 
is critical to it being “U.S. Coast Guard Approved,” as required by Annex I (COLREGs, paragraph 14 and 
Inland, 33 CFR 84.20). 
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that: 
 

Basic navigation lights required by most vessels including the arc
of visibility of each of the lights. Exact placement aboard the vessel
depends  upon  size  and  design  but  must  be  in  accordance  with
Annex I of the Rules (33 CFR 84). 

  boaters avoid purchase and installation of any light that does not present the required certification 

data, and 
retailers advise their customers to purchase certified navigation lights. 

 

 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or  
international  safety,  operational,  or  material  requirement.    This  Alert  has  been  developed  by  the  U.S. 
Coast Guard’s Headquarters’ Offices of Navigation Systems, Auxiliary and Boating Safety, and Investiga-
tions and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns, please email cgnav@uscg.mil.   
 

 

 

****** 

2 

