 
 
 
 
 
September 17, 2008                                                                                                                 Alert 5-08 
Washington, DC   
 

PREVENTING ENGINE EXHAUST SYSTEM FIRES 

 
This  Safety  Alert  addresses  the  issue  of  preventing  unwanted  fires  caused  by  high  temperature 
components  associated  with  turbochargers  and  engine  exhaust  systems  in  close  proximity  to 
combustible ship structures.  
 
Two recent marine casualties involving inspected passenger vessels resulted in personnel injury, fire 
damage to machinery and ship structures, operational down time and lost revenues.  In both cases, 
the  vessels  were  recently  re-powered  with  new  turbocharged  engines  having  exhaust  systems 
designed to operate at higher temperatures than the previous engines.  Investigations into each case 
identified common discrepancies as follows: 
 

•  Failure to properly insulate or shield combustible ship structures from engine exhaust systems 

in accordance with 46 CFR §182.430. 

•  Failure to properly submit documentation for plan review, which may have identified failures to 

comply with 46 CFR regulations. 

 
As  a  result  of  these  recent  incidents  and  due  to  other  related  casualties  involving  small  passenger 
vessels, the U. S. Coast Guard strongly recommends vessel owners and operators to: 
 
Inspect vessel engine exhaust systems, machinery spaces, and exhaust compartments to verify that 
lagging and insulation are properly installed to shield hot surfaces and combustible materials.   Proper 
insulation and shielding methods will help to prevent fires due to flammable and combustible liquids 
spraying onto hot surfaces (i.e. turbochargers, exhaust piping) and will prevent combustible surfaces 
(i.e.  wood,  fiberglass,  FRP)  from  heating  up  to  ignition  temperatures  due  to  close  proximity  to  hot 
surfaces.  Pay particular attention to areas where exhaust systems penetrate bulkheads and decks, 
making sure that combustible surfaces are properly shielded and/or insulated using non-combustible 
materials. 
 
Ensure  that  proper  submittals  for  plan  review  are  made  and  documented  with  the  local  U.S.  Coast 
Guard  Sector  Office  of  Prevention.    Plan  reviews  are  required  whenever  engines  and/or  propulsion 
systems are changed or modified.  This includes re-engine projects where engines are not replaced 
in-kind, but with different types of engines or engine manufacturers. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  the  District  11  Prevention 
Division  and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Analysis,  United  States  Coast  Guard 
Headquarters, Washington, DC.   

 
Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 

