  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 16, 1998 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

REPOWERING WOOD BOATS 

      Safety Alert 01-98 
 

the  operator  of  an 

Upon return from a routine day fishing trip in November 
1997, 
inspected  wood  small 
passenger  vessel  reported  that  his  vessel  was  taking 
on  water  at  the  dock  after  discharging  passengers. 
Preliminary  investigation  indicated  that  the  starboard 
chine  log  and  outside  starter  plank  of  his  41  ft  cross-
planked Chesapeake deadrise hull were fractured. 

Further  investigation  revealed  that  the  28  year  old  vessel  had  replaced  the  existing  and  original  twin 
gasoline engine installation with twin diesels at the beginning of the season. Although the diesels were of 
comparable horsepower, they were double the physical size and weight of the original installation, with an 
available  peak  torque  of  over  twice  the  existing  gasoline  engines.  For  details,  see  Traveling  Inspection 
Report dated January 15, 1998 and Safety Alert message dated February 5, 1998. 

Diesel technology has advanced rapidly in the last ten years, with engines becoming increasingly efficient 
for their size. These mechanical advances coupled with already proven planing hull designs may result in 
combinations  which  drive  existing  wood  hulls  harder  than  envisioned  by  their  original  builders  and  or 
designers. Some already optimized designs may not have sufficient structure to survive such a re-powering 
without additional hull strengthening or careful engine choice. 

CROSS-PLANKED HULLS 

Cross-planked hulls are a type of vee-bottom construction unique to the Chesapeake Bay, although Coast 
Guard  records  indicate  that  these  vessels  are  operating  throughout  the  country  .  Their  construction  is 
unique  in  that  the  side  planking  above  the  chine  is  run  fore  and  aft  with  vertical  side  frames  at  regular 
intervals, while the bottom planks run perpendicular to the keel instead of fore and aft. The side frames end 
at the chine, and do not extend to the keel. The bottom structure consists of longitudinal stringers or "sister 
keels"  run  fore  and  aft  at  regular  intervals  between  the  keel  and  the  chine.  Transverse  strength  is  via 
strategically  placed  "strongback"  timbers  which  run  chine  to  chine  and  are  generally  tied  into  the  side 
planking with sizeable brackets. (See NVIC 7-95 and BOATBUILDING by Howard Chappelle) 

1 

When  these  hulls  are  loaded,  the  chine  log 
and starter plank will give the first indication of 
structural  failure.  The  construction  detail  in 
these  areas  may  also  contribute  to  the  hull 
failure  mechanism,  whether  brought  on  by 
natural  aging  or  exacerbated  by  increased 
propulsion power installation. The direction of 
the  wood  grain  selected  in  order  to  bend  the 
chine  and  starter  planks  in  place  runs  fore 
and  aft.  The  side  frame  heels  are  generally 
bolted from the outside in, through the starter 
plank and face of the chine log to pick up the 
frame.  These  frame  bolts  are  generally  in  a 
line horizontally with grain of the chine log.  

Initial  indications  include  shallow  checking  of  the  face 
of  the  chine  log  on  the  inside  or  on  the  face  of  the 
starter plank on the outside "bolt to bolt." 

As the hull continues to work, these checks can widen 
into fractures, with the worst case of both the chine log 
and  the  outside  starter  plank  fracturing  all  the  all  the 
way through.  

 

2 

 

 

The chine log and starter planks on all cross-planked hulls should be inspected closely at each scheduled 
drydock  inspection  for  early  signs  of  deterioration.  When  inspected  underway,  leakage  on  the  top  of  the 
chine log may indicate a split starter plank, versus leakage on the bottom of the chine which is an indication 
of the condition of the bottom planking to chine connection. These areas should be looked at closely before 
re-powering  schemes  are  approved,  so  that  any  preliminary  indications  can  be  fully  documented  and 
watched over time 

OTHER WOOD HULLS 

Although the above casualty and discussion are specific to Chesapeake cross-planked deadrise hulls, the 
issue  of  re-powering  and  its  impact  on  existing  wood  hulls  is  applicable  regardless  of  design.  This  is 
particularly  important  when  the  conversion  is  made  from  gasoline  to  diesel  engines.  Because  of  the 
inherently  higher  torque  available  from  diesels,  they  will  allow  an  operator  to  drive  the  hull  harder  in  sea 
conditions where a gasoline engine would load down and automatically force a reduction in speed. Lightly 
built  planing  hulls  that  will  continue  to  perform  with  increased  power  should  be  targeted  and  examined 
closely both before and after modification for any adverse effects to the hull structure. Field offices should 
not hesitate to involve the Hull Division of the Marine Safety Center (202-366-6481) when existing inspected 
wood  hulls  are  re-powered,  or  require  owners  to  prove  structural  sufficiency  by  utilizing  the  services  of  a 
qualified naval architect. The G-MO-1 Traveling Inspection staff (202-267-1080) is available to assist in the 
field evaluation of existing installations showing signs of structural deficiency.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil 

 

 

2 

