 
 
 
 
 
 
May 12, 2017 
Washington, DC                             

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 04-17 

Whether at Work or at Play Remember it’s a Shared Waterway. 

Know the Navigation Rules and enjoy your day! 

incident  occurred  during 

Red dots indicate kayaker positions  
over a seven second time period. 
 

 
This  Safety  Alert  reminds  all  operators  of  power-
driven,  sail,  and  human  propelled  vessels  of  the 
importance of maintaining a sharp look-out while on 
a  shared  waterway  and  recommends 
that  all 
recreational boaters carry a DSC-VHF marine radio 
in order to communicate with other vessels. 
 
Recently a catamaran type passenger ferry collided 
with  a  group  of  kayakers  on  a  busy  metropolitan 
waterway.  The 
late 
afternoon while the sun was low on the horizon with 
an  angle  of  about  15  degrees  and  the  ferry  was 
heading westerly into the sun’s glare.  The ferry had 
just begun its voyage and was operating at about 20 
knots  across 
the  waterway  while  a  group  of 
kayakers was ahead of the ferry and heading south.  The low angle of the sun created significant glare 
on the water, obstructing the ferry operator’s view of the kayakers who were within the reflected light. 
The kayakers did not have a DSC-VHF marine radio with them and they were unable to hail the ferry. 
The ferry subsequently collided with multiple kayaks resulting in two serious injuries.  
 
It  is  critical  that  all  mariners,  including  recreational  boaters,  have  a  good  working  knowledge  of  the 
Navigation  Rules  before  venturing  out  into  a  shared  waterway.    Commercial  and  recreational  vessel 
operators  need  to  know  their  responsibilities  including  the  Steering  and  Sailing  Rules,  Conduct  of 
Vessels in Sight of One Another, and Conduct of Vessels in Restricted Visibility.  They also need to 
recognize  the  nautical  lights  and  shapes  and  understand  the  sound  and  light  signals  that  may  be 
encountered in order to take appropriate actions to prevent collisions.  
 
It is also critical that recreational boaters are able to communicate with all other vessels.  If unsure of 
another vessel’s intentions boaters need the ability to contact the other vessel on the radio in order to 
indicate their location and ask such questions as “Do you see me?” and “What are your intentions?”.  
For  more  information  on  navigation  rules  and  maritime  communications  please  visit  the  USCG 
Navigation Center Website. 
 
Operators  of  marinas  and  rental  facilities  are  encouraged  to  develop  guidelines  for  safety  briefings, 
required safety equipment and for outfitting guides and renters with maritime communication devices. 
For more information please visit RentalBoatSafety.com. 
 

 

 

Safety Alert 04-17 

 

 
There are many safety topics important to paddlesport enthusiasts.  Depending upon where you plan 
to paddle, the required skill sets may be minimal or they can be highly technical in nature.  Persons 
new to paddlesports will benefit from taking a paddlesports safety course and the knowledge gained 
will  increase  their  enjoyment  on  the  water.    An  example  of  a  free  online  course  is  located  at 
boaterexam.com.  Training is also available from the American Canoe Association (ACA) and United 
States Coast Guard Auxiliary.  
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that all paddlesport enthusiasts participate in boating safety 
education  as  well  as  taking  paddlecraft  specific  skills  training.    Additionally,  the  following  best 
practices should be considered every time before going out on the water: 
 

•  Always wear a Coast Guard approved life jacket 
•  Make yourself be seen (bright / contrasting clothing) 
•  Carry a sound producing device such as a whistle 
•  Carry a DCS-VHF radio 
•  Know your paddling limits 
•  Know the area where you will be operating 
•  Avoid paddling in main channels of busy waterways when possible 
•  Dress appropriately for the water temperature and forecasted weather 
•  Don’t paddle alone 
•  Tell a friend where you are going and when you will return - file a float plan. 
• 

If  you  plan  to  be  out  after  dark,  you  will  be  required  to  exhibit  an  all-round  light  or  have  a 
flashlight readily available 

•  Don’t drink alcohol and operate a boat or paddlecraft 

 
The free Coast Guard Mobile App includes many resources including a function to file a float plan. 
 
Online information on Shared Waterways is available at TheSafeHarbors.us  
 
This  Safety  Alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed by the Office of Boating Safety 
and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis,  Washington  DC.    Questions 
may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 
 

 

2 

