 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
January 27, 2004                                                                                                                 Alert 1-04 
Washington, DC   
 

POTENTIAL SERIOUS SAFETY HAZARD 

NORSAFE CAMSAFE LIFEBOAT RELEASE MECHANISMS 

 
Recently  a  NORSAFE  Miriam  8.5  meter  lifeboat  equipped  with  NORSAFE  Camsafe  release 
mechanism fell from a semisubmersible mobile offshore drilling unit during initial preparation for sea 
trials.  While  the  lifeboat  was  being  recovered  and  raised  to  its  stowage  position,  the  aft  hook 
unexpectedly  released  at  a  height  of  about  70  feet,  followed  by  the  disengagement  of  the  forward 
hook as it took the full load of the boat. The boat tumbled and fell to the water landing upside down, 
causing one fatality and injuring two other crewmen. 
 
The  NORSAFE  Camsafe  release  mechanism  became  available  in  2000.  It  is  not  Coast  Guard 
approved,  however,  it  may  be  fitted  on  some  NORSAFE  lifeboats  accepted  by  the  Coast  Guard 
based on Norwegian approval.  
 
After  the  accident  the  release  mechanism  control  lever  was  found  in  the  locked  position  inside  the 
boat,  but  it  is  apparent  that  the  hook  itself  was  not  fully  engaged  with  the  cam  inside  the  release 
mechanism.  Subsequent  investigation  found  that  the  release  mechanism  control  lever  could  be 
placed in the locked position even though the locking cam had not properly engaged the hook. In this 
condition, the mechanism can appear upon casual examination to be locked and, due to the design 
and roughness of the hook and cam surfaces, it could bear a significant load. However, the hook can 
in fact release at any time without warning.  
 
Satisfactory  engagement  and  locking  of  the  release  device  is  dependent  upon  successful  mating 
between the male and female portions of the cam and hook, respectively, as shown in the following 
drawing.  

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
When  properly  engaged,  the  seam  between  the  edges  of  the 
mating  components  will  be  clearly  visible  in  the  inspection 
window  located  on  one  side  of  the  release  mechanism. 
Observation  of  the  components  within  this  window  will  enable 
confirmation of complete cam-to-hook engagement and look as 
depicted on the right. 
 
It is important to note that this window is impossible to see from 
inside  the  lifeboat  and  the  associated  lifeboat  and  release 
mechanism  manuals  are  not  clear  on  what  the  viewer  should 
look for to ensure proper engagement.  
 
The  casualty 
recommendations are likely to follow.  
 
In the interim the Coast Guard strongly recommends:  
 

is  not  complete.  Additional 

investigation 

•  That  only  those  launching  and  recovery  operations  that  are  absolutely  necessary  should  be 

carried out with lifeboats having the Camsafe release mechanisms.  

•  Prior to launching the lifeboat, proper cam engagement must be verified as well as each time 

the boat is lifted for recovery operations. 

 
Verification Procedure 
 
All  ships  with  NORSAFE  lifeboats  should  be  inspected  immediately  to  determine  whether  they  are 
fitted with Camsafe release mechanisms. Lifeboats fitted with Camsafe release mechanisms should 
be examined as described below. 
 

1.  With  the  lifeboat  in  the  STOWED  position,  and  MAINTENANCE  PENDANTS  FITTED,  check 
the inspection window of the hook (which may be outboard) to determine whether the cam and 
hook are completely engaged. 

2.  A properly engaged cam and hook will look like this: 

 

 

 

 

3.  An improperly engaged hook and cam may look like this: 

 

IMPORTANT - The inside surface of the opposite side plate (or half) of the release mechanism 
will be visible, unless a significant portion of the hook is out side the side plates. 
 

4.  If  the  cam  and  hook  are  not  completely  engaged,  the  load  of  the  boat  must  be  temporarily 
transferred  from  the  release  mechanism  and  on  to  the  maintenance  pendants.  Next  the 
release lever at the helmsman's station is reset while the hook is pushed into place by hand to 
ensure  the  cam  and  hook  are  completely  engaged.  The  load  may  then  be  returned  to  the 
release  mechanism  after  confirming  complete  cam  engagement  through  the  inspection 
window. 

 
With  the  cam  and  hook  completely  engaged,  the  release  mechanism  is  safe  to  use.  However,  until 
the investigation has been completed, and the need for corrective measures for the Camsafe release 
mechanism and/or installation has been determined, ONLY THOSE LAUNCHING AND RECOVERY 
OPERATIONS THAT ARE ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY SHOULD BE CARRIED OUT, with lifeboats 
having the Camsafe release mechanisms. 
 
Questions  regarding  this  information  and  reports  of  any  Camsafe  release  mechanisms  found  not 
completely engaged may be addressed to LT Todd Howard of the Coast Guard's Life Saving and Fire 
Safety Division at (202) 267-6854 or THoward@comdt.uscg.mil. 
 
NOTE - On January 29, 2004 additional information relating to this safety alert was distributed 
as follows: 
 

LIFEBOAT RELEASE MECHANISMS 

Based  on  comments  and  questions  on  the  recent  January  27,  2004  Lifeboat  Release  Mechanism 
Safety Alert, the Coast Guard is providing the following clarification regarding access to the Camsafe 
inspection window, resetting procedures, and the safety of other release mechanism designs.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

•  The  Camsafe  (7T)  inspection  window  is  impossible  to  see  from  inside  the  Norsafe,  Miriam 
lifeboat  and  therefore  the  crewmember  must  either  crawl  out  the  hatch  near  the  release 
mechanism or use the side hatch to go around the outside of the boat to check the window.  

•  The associated lifeboat and release mechanism manuals differ and are not clear on what the 
crewmember  should  look  for  to  ensure  proper  engagement.  (See  detailed  description  and 
photographs in the previous message.) The release mechanism manual is less detailed than 
the  lifeboat  manual,  but  neither  makes  it  clear  that,  to  ensure  complete  engagement  of  the 
hook and cam, the crewmember at the release mechanism must push on the hook tail while 
the helmsman closes the release lever.  

•  The  posted  instructions  within  the  lifeboat  do  not  completely  cover  all  the  required  steps  to 

safely recover the lifeboat.  

•  The use of the seat harness while raising the lifeboat might have prevented the fatality and is 

recommended anytime the lifeboat is raised or lowered. 

 
There have been a number of casualties associated with recovery of lifeboats and the testing of their 
release mechanisms, and it is currently the subject of study and discussions within the International 
Maritime Organization (IMO).  
 
The  Coast  Guard  emphasizes  that  while  lifeboat  release  mechanisms  are  required  by  IMO 
regulations  to  be  protected  against  accidental  or  premature  release  when  under  load,  the  methods 
and effectiveness of protection vary with different manufacturers' designs. Accidents can occur with 
most designs if they are not used properly.  
 
Mariners must never assume that any release mechanism will work like the one on their last 
ship -- study how each mechanism works and practice with it.  
 
Questions regarding this information may be addressed to LT Todd Howard of the Coast Guard's Life 
Saving and Fire Safety Division at (202) 267-6854 or THoward@comdt.uscg.mil. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

