 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
December 31, 2013 
Washington, DC                                 Entanglement Accidents 

 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 

   Alert 11-13 

A  recent  marine  casualty  involving  a  severe  injury  to  a  crewmember 
aboard an inspected passenger vessel reminds us that these hazards 
happen  in  any  segment  of  the  maritime  industry.    Moving,  rotating, 
and  reciprocating  machinery  may  include  (but  are  not  limited  to) 
rotating  or  spinning  shafts,  fan  blades,  fan  or  serpentine  belts, 
gearing,  hydraulic  ram  assemblies,  couplings,  arms, 
linkages, 
windlasses,  drums,  blocks,  booms,  and  sheaves,  etc..    In  this 
instance,  a  crewmember’s  hair  became  entangled  with  a  rotating 
propeller  shaft  as  the  crewmember  was  on  watch  and  conducting 
rounds.    The  crew  member  sustained  life-threatening  injuries  and  is 
permanently  disfigured.    Although  the  investigation  of  this  casualty  is  not  complete,  initial 
observations serve to remind all vessel owner / operators, and crew members of the hazards onboard 
vessels of all types.   
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends that vessel owner /operators evaluate their vessels for the 
presence  of  moving,  rotating,  reciprocating  or  articulating  machinery  hazards,  and  implement 
documented common-sense policies, procedures, and safety measures:  
 

(cid:57)  Never wear loose fitting clothing, jewelry or personal gear in the vicinity of such equipment. 

(cid:57)  Keep long hair tied back to avoid entanglement; 

(cid:57)  Install and maintain guards and protective equipment to prevent  personnel contact;  

(cid:57)  Post appropriate hazard signs; 

(cid:57)  Never energize machinery unless certain that all personnel are well clear; 

 

 

 

 

 

(cid:57)  Follow proper lock-out tag-out procedures when working near or on such equipment, and  

ensure  it  has  been  verified  that  local  or  remote  motor  controls  have  been  tagged-out  or 
disabled and completely de-energized; 

(cid:57)  Develop procedural safeguards that eliminate, as far as practicable, personnel’s need to be in 

proximity to hazardous machinery when in operation; 

(cid:57)  Regularly conduct onboard safety training to emphasize safety procedures and the hazards of 

machinery, include deck and engine department, cargo equipment, and tools;  
 

(cid:57)  Always be vigilant for new risks and dangers presented to your crews and  passengers.  

 
This alert is for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international safety, 
operational, or material requirement.  Developed by the Fifth Coast Guard District, Portsmouth, VA.  
Questions  may  be  addressed  to  LCDR  Ken  Morton,  (757)  398-6284,  or  may  be  forwarded  to  D05-
DG-Prevention-DPI-PFB-Staff@uscg.mil.  

