  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 1997 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

DRY ENGINE EXHAUST HAZARDS 

      Safety Alert 06-97 
 

Owners and operators of vessels using dry type engine exhaust systems are strongly cautioned to 
check  the  condition  of  all  exhaust  pipes,  insulation,  and  adjacent  stack  areas  to  ensure  that  no 
combustible materials come in contact with, or in close proximity to, hot exhaust pipes.  

 

Recently, a fire erupted aboard a small wooden passenger vessel (approximately 70 ft in length) 
carrying over 60 people. Although the official investigation is not complete, information available at 
this time indicates that sparks or radiant heat from the exhaust pipes apparently ignited a fire in the 
vicinity of the smokestack. Crew members initially responded to the fire by discharging two carbon 
dioxide  extinguishers  at  the  flames.  Once  this  action  proved  to  be  futile,  the  crew  members 
deployed the vessel's fire hose. In the few short minutes it took to retrieve and lead out the hose, 
the flames fully engulfed the vessel; elapsed time was approximately five minutes.  

The smokestack in this case consisted of several exhaust pipes passing vertically through a stack 
facade.  The  facade  was  fabricated  of  wood  and  sheathed  in  non  fire  retardant  fiberglass. 
Constructed  as  it  was,  the  flames  quickly  spread  throughout  the  stack  area  and  progressed 
unimpeded through the wooden vessel.  

Operators  of  similarly  constructed  vessels  should  be  aware  of  the  potential  fire  hazards  that  dry 
exhaust systems present and should take all the necessary precautions to ensure these systems 
are properly constructed, insulated, and that the insulation is itself in good condition and properly 
secured. The stack and any void spaces located in and around it should also be free and clear of 
all  combustibles.  Luckily,  the  vessel  was  operating  in  protected  waters  and  in  close  proximity  to 
shore at the time of the casualty. Had this incident occurred under different circumstances it could 
have easily led to more serious injury or even death. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

1 

