 

 
 
 
 
 
 
November 21, 2006                                                                                                                               Alert 5-06 
Washington, DC 
 
Structural Integrity of Propulsion Boiler Casings 
 
Recently  a  Great  Lakes  bulk  cargo  vessel  suffered  a  boiler  tube  rupture  resulting  in  a  boiler  casing  failure 
which injured two crewmembers.  The tube failure was not unique and the boiler casing should have contained 
and channeled the steam out the stack.   
 
An  investigation  revealed  that  the  structural  integrity  of  the  inboard  boiler  casing  was  compromised  and  the 
increase  in  internal  casing  pressure  caused  by  the flashing  of  water  into  steam  and  its  expansion  caused  a 
portion of the casing to separate, allowing the steam and a mixture of soot, refractory and other debris to be 
released  in  the  vicinity  of  the  operating  station.  (Attachment  detail  1)  Investigators  discovered  a  number  of 
areas where the strength of the inboard casing was compromised.    
 
The aft inboard corner of the boiler casing is constructed of three inch angle iron which runs vertically to the top 
of the boiler.  Attached to it are the studs which hold the dogs that secure the inboard most door of the aft side.  
The  bottom  of  the  vertical  run  should  be  welded  to  a  similar  piece  of  three  inch  angle  iron  which  runs 
transversely across the boiler front.  The transverse leg of the angle iron remained attached but the vertical leg 
had been cut away during a previous modification and not refastened.  (Attachment detail 2) 
 
The  inboard  boiler  casing  at  the  intersection  of  the  steam  drum  is  not  permanently  attached.    (Attachment 
detail 3)  The edge of the casing is fitted into a flanged expansion joint. An inner flange is welded perpendicular 
to  the  drum  surface and  the  outer  half  is bolted to  it.  The  two flanges form  a  slot  and the  outermost  casing 
edge fits within. This arrangement allows for drum movement due to thermal expansion of boiler components 
without damaging the casing.  It also prevents the casing from moving in any direction. For reasons unknown, 
about 20 inches of the aftermost edge of the casing which should have been recessed into the slot was cut 
away;  weakening  the  strength  of  the  casing.  This  modification  combined  with  the fact  that  the  corner  at  the 
upper casing between the inboard and aft casing had been cut away, left the after portion of the upper inboard 
casing substantially unsupported.   (Attachment detail 4) 
 
To  prevent  a  similar  casualty,  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard  strongly  recommends  that  owner  operators  of  steam 
propelled  vessels  have  their  engineering  staffs  assess  the  structural  integrity  of  their  boiler  casings;  paying 
particular  attention  to  support  structure  interfaces  at  the  steam  drum,  front  to  side  casing  attachments  and 
upper to lower casing transitions.   It is also recommended that a thorough review of previous casing repairs be 
conducted to identify signs of diminished structural integrity.  For U.S. flag vessels, any repairs necessitated by 
this  assessment  should  be  coordinated  with  the  cognizant  Officer  in  Charge  Marine  Inspection  and 
Classification Society representatives to ensure that the equipment is reconstructed as originally designed and 
in accordance with good marine practice. 
 
Questions  pertaining  to  this  safety  alert  may  be  addressed  to  CDR  Brian  Fisher  of  the  USCG  Quality 
Assurance  Staff  at  brian.t.fisher@uscg.mil  or  Mr.  Ken  Olsen  at  kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil  of  the  Office  of 
Investigations and Analysis. 
 
This information and the attached graphics are provided for informational purposes only and does not relieve 
any existing domestic or international safety requirement.  

 

 

Attachment to Safety Alert 5-06

The drawing below  is provided for informational purposes only and may not represent the exact boiler
associated with the casualty.

Detail 1

(Aft side of casing.)

Detail 3

Drum

Outer Flange

Edge fits under this flange.

Edge that w a s c u t

a w a y.

Inboard Casing

Detail 4

Inboard Casing

Detail 2

Area  of Detail 1.

Side View

(Inboard side of casing.)

