 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 16, 2016 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

                                 Safety Alert 10-16 

Iron Mike will steer straight but you control your fate! 

Avoid Auto-Pilot Induced Casualties 

 

This safety alert addresses the safe navigation of vessels while operating with an auto-pilot engaged.  
In the recent past there have been numerous instances in the Gulf of Mexico where a crew boat or 
supply  vessel  and  other  commercial  craft  allided  with  oil  rigs  or  structures  or  collided  with  other 
vessels,  causing  significant  injuries,  property  damage,  platform  fires,  and  oil  or  gas  well  shut-ins. 
These  casualties  often  result  in  serious  injuries  and  have  the  potential  for  multiple  fatalities  and 
serious environmental damage.  In the “Oil Patch” it is standard practice to engage auto-pilot systems 
while transiting to and from job sites both in open and in restricted waters (e.g., platform fields), often 
regardless  of  visibility.    Auto-pilot  induced  casualties  are  not  limited  to  commercial  oil  field  vessels 
and casualties have occurred on other vessel types that are equipped with auto-pilot systems. 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Auto-pilot  systems  can  reduce  the  monotony  of  steering  by  freeing  up  the  helmsman  to  step  away 
from  the  helm  in  order  to  perform  other  minor  pilot  house  tasks  and  gain  different  navigational 
viewpoints.    There  are  also  disadvantages  that  have  the  potential  to  lead  to  negligent  navigational 
practices.  Over-reliance on these systems can allow an operator to get too engrossed in performing 
other work on the bridge and, in some extreme cases, can lead to watchstanders leaving the bridge 
for  extended  periods  of  time.    This  inattentiveness  to  the  vessel’s  navigation  has  led  to  marine 
casualties. 
 
It should come as no surprise that when an inattentive operator meets with extreme circumstances, 
he  or  she  usually  has  no  time  to  take  corrective  actions.    Also,  in  some  past  incidents,  when  there 

 

 

 

1 

Safety Alert 10 -16 

 

was  time  to  take  corrective  action,  the  operator’s  lack  of  system  knowledge  hindered  the  need  to 
rapidly change over from auto-pilot to manual steerage mode. 
 
Specific regulations govern the use of auto-pilots, and these regulations can be found throughout 46 
Code  of  Federal  Regulations,  with  specific  applicability  within  the  respective  subchapters.  (46  CFR 
35.20-45,  46  CFR  97.16,  46  CFR  122.360,  46  CFR  131.960,  and  46  CFR  185.360)    The  general 
regulation found in 46 Code of Federal Regulations reads as follows: 
 
Use  of  Auto-Pilot  –  When  the  automatic  pilot  is  used  in  areas  of  high  traffic  density,  conditions  of 
restricted  visibility,  or  any  other  hazardous  navigational  situations,  the  master  shall  ensure  that: 

is  possible 

to 

immediately  establish  manual  control  of 

the  vessel’s  steering; 

•  A  competent  person 

is 

ready  at  all 

times 

to 

take  over  steering  control;  and  

•  The changeover from automatic to manual control of the vessel’s steering and the reverse is 

made by, or under the supervision of, the master or officer of the watch. 

 
The U.S. Coast Guard strongly recommends that owners and operators ensure that all credentialed 
mariners:  
 

•  Are fully aware of “Use of Auto-Pilot” regulations found in the vessel’s respective subchapter in 

 

 
 

• 

It 
 

 

46 Code of Federal Regulations. 
 

limitations of the auto-pilot system. 

•  Conduct  periodic  training  to  ensure  that  crews  are  properly  versed  in  the  operations  and 

•  Develop and prominently post written procedures on how to switch from auto-pilot to manual 

control in the vicinity of the auto-pilot system. 

•  Review company policies and evaluate setting operational limitations on the use of auto-pilot 
with  regard  to  areas  of  high  traffic  density,  conditions  of  restricted  visibility,  or  any  other 
hazardous navigational situations. 
 

NOTE:    NOTHING  exempts  a  vessel  operator  from  the  requirements  of  the  International  and 
Inland Navigation Rules of the Road.  Conduct of vessels in any condition of visibility: Rule 5 
– Look-Out: Every vessel shall at all times maintain a proper look-out by sight and hearing as 
well as by all available means appropriate in the prevailing circumstances and conditions so 
as to make a full appraisal of the situation and of the risk of collision. 

 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational, or material requirements. Developed by Marine Safety Unit Morgan 
City  and  distributed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and  Casualty  Analysis.    Questions  or  comments 
may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil. 

2 

 

 

 

