  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 22, 1997 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

SUCESSFUL RESCUES IN NEW ENGLAND 

      Safety Alert 05-97 
 

Use  of  EPIRBS  and  other  survival  equipment  saves  lives  on  fishing  vessels.  (Text  taken  from  a 
letter  issued  January  22,  1997  from  the  office  of  Rear  Admiral  J.  L.  Linnon,  Commander,  First 
Coast Guard District.) Courtesy of the First U.S. Coast Guard District Office, Boston, MA  

Disaster at sea among New England's fishing fleet was averted on three occasions last week due 
to the presence on board each vessel of simple yet vital distress warning and lifesaving equipment. 
The  fishing  vessels  COMMODORE  and  TRINITY,  hundreds  of  miles  apart  and  many  miles 
offshore, began sinking within hours of one another in the midst of a severe winter storm. Later the 
same day the fishing vessel LADY MARIA's pilothouse was destroyed in heavy seas. In each case 
the  Coast  Guard  received  initial  notification  of  distress  by  an  electronic  signal  emitted  from  the 
vessel's  406  MHz  Emergency  Position  Indicating  Radio  Beacon  (406  EPIRB).  The  406  EPIRB  is 
much  more  capable  than  earlier  class  A  or  B  EPIRBs  (121.5  or  243  Mhz).  Its  signal  provides  us 
accurate  position  information  and,  if  properly  registered,  will  also  provide  information  on  the 
vessel's  owner/operator,  homeport,  home  and  business  phones,  etc.  Through  the  406  EPIRB 
signal we were able to immediately ascertain that there was in fact a distress at sea and promptly 
dispatched rescue units to the appropriate locations. Equally important was that each vessel had 
ample  cold  water  survival  suits  available  for  the  crew,  and  inflatable  liferafts  (crews  from  the 
COMMODORE  and  TRINITY  abandoned  ship).  All  crewmen--six  in  COMMODORE,  five  onboard 
TRINITY, and four in LADY MAMA--were promptly rescued and returned safely to their loved ones.  

I should also caution mariners to guard against inadvertent activation of EPIRBs - false alarms that 
needlessly  divert  Coast  Guard  rescue  units  from  real  distress  cases  --by  ensuring  EPIRBs  are 
securely  mounted  and  properly  maintained 
the  manufacturer's 
recommendations.  

in  accordance  with 

I  urge  all  who  venture  to  sea,  particularly  in  New  England  waters,  to  heed  the  lessons  of 
COMMODORE,  TRINITY,  and  LADY  MARIA.  Registered  406  EPIRBs,  survival  suits,  inflatable 
liferafts, and other lifesaving gear should be onboard, and crews should know where this gear is 
located and how to use it. These vital pieces of equipment can easily be the difference between a 
successful rescue and disaster. 

Signed by J.L LINNON 
Rear Admiral, U.S. Coast Guard  
Commander, First Coast Guard District  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 
 

1 

