  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 5, 2003 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 

      Safety Alert 08-03 
 

Last spring an uninspected towing vessel (UTV) suffered a personnel casualty while engaged in a 
dredging operation. The casualty resulted in serious injury to a crewmember and an undisclosed 
monetary settlement of a Jones Act Claim against the marine employer by the injured crewman.  

The  crewmember  was  conducting  an  unscheduled  repair  to  a  navigation  light  fixture  attached  to 
the  mast  located  above  the  upper  wheelhouse.  For  personal  fall  protection,  the  crewmember 
collected a body belt and a positioning lanyard from a storage location on the vessel.  

The crewmember climbed the mast, fastened the lanyard around the mast, leaned back supported 
by the belt and began working. Just minutes into the repair the lanyard parted. The crewmember 
fell to the deck approximately 40 feet below and sustained a broken leg, arm, ribs and contusions 
to the head and back.  

The  Coast  Guard's  investigation  focused  on  the  human  element  and  equipment  performance. 
Although  the  investigation  is  not  yet  complete,  important  regulatory  issues  regarding  the  use, 
training, and storage of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) have been discovered. Specifically:  

•  Effective  January  1,  1998,  body  belts  were  deemed  unacceptable  for  use  as  part  of  a 

personal fall arrest system by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).  

•  The  manufacturer's  instructions  for  the  proper  use,  care  and  inspection  schedule  for  the 

body belt and positioning lanyard were not followed.  

•  The marine employer did not adhere to the requirements of 29 CFR 1915.159 for personal 

fall arrest systems.  

positioning device systems.  

•  The  marine  employer  did  not  adhere  to  the  requirements  of  29  CFR  1915.160  for 

•  The  marine  employer  did  not  adhere  to  the  requirements  of  29  CFR  1915.152,  general 

requirements for training and documentation.  

Investigators determined that the positioning lanyard was manufactured in November of 1993. The 
manufacturer's  instructions  called  for  semi-annual  inspection  and  removal  from  service  no  later 
than November of 1998.  

Further  investigation  revealed  that  company  policy  prohibited  the  use  of  a  body  belt  for  personal 
fall protection and required the use of a full body harness; however, the vessel was never provided 
with a body harness and instead retained two body belts and lanyards. The Coast Guard could not 
establish that the involved individuals had been trained on their use, storage and limitations.  

1 

Persons owning and operating uninspected vessels are required to comply with OSHA regulations 
with  regards  to  PPE  and  are  subject  to  fines  for  noncompliance.  Owners/operators  are  strongly 
encouraged to:  

•  Visit  the  U.S.  Department  of  Labor  website  to  view  Directive  CPL  2-1.20  -  OSHA  /  U.S. 

Coast Guard Authority Over Vessels at: http://www.osha.gov .  

•  Develop, document and provide specialized crew training which includes demonstrations to 

ensure familiarity with use, storage, and limitations of Personal Protective Equipment.  

Questions related to this information may be directed to the U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Office 
Hampton Roads, Investigations Office at (757) 668-5540.  

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

 

2 

