         

 
 
May 20, 2011 
Washington, DC 

 

 

 

   Alert 04-11 

High Velocity Vent Valves, Vacuum Valves, P/V Valves 

Simple to check, easy to maintain, don’t let them be a problem again. 

 
A recent marine casualty resulted in significant damage to tank structures, piping and components of 
a combination chemical / oil product carrier.  Vessel-to-vessel loading operations were taking place at 
anchorage  and  one  tank  became  over-pressurized.    Subsequently,  three  cargo  tanks  and  three 
ballast  tanks  on  the  ship  suffered  catastrophic  structural  failures  that  allowed  hazardous  cargo  to 
migrate throughout those areas.  This incident caused the vessel to list and created a very dangerous 
explosion hazard requiring costly and time-consuming lightering and repair operations. Additionally, it 
presented a hazard to the port and persons involved. 
 
The investigation is nearly complete and investigators have identified 
several causal factors, one being the failure of the high velocity vent 
valve which did not open and prevent over pressurization of the tank 
while it was being filled.   
 
The  high  velocity  vent  valve  is  part  of  the  pressure  /  vacuum 
protection piping of the cargo tank. It prevents damage to cargo tanks 
by  normally  staying  closed  and  only  opening  at  a  preset  positive 
pressure.  Large shipboard tanks can be easily damaged by relatively 
low  pressures.  Use  of  these  valves  minimizes  such  occurrences.  
Other benefits of the valve being in a closed position is that breathing 
of  the  tank  is  minimized  thus  preventing  unwanted  cargo  vapor 
releases into the atmosphere, protecting the environment and limiting 
the  loss  of  cargo  due  to  vaporization.  The  valves  are  also  equipped 
with flame screens to prevent explosions due to ignition. The vacuum 
breaker  component  of  pressure  /  vacuum  protection  piping  of  the 
cargo  tank  similarly  protects  the  tank  by  preventing  excessive 
vacuum from being formed. 
 
After this specific casualty, the high velocity vent valve of the tank being filled was found stuck closed 
and inoperable using the manual test lever. A valve for another tank was also found stuck. Scientific 
testing  of  the  substance  between  the  stuck  valve  disc  and  the  seating  surfaces  indicated  the 
presence  of  oxidized  vegetable  oil  or  fat  likely  from  previous  cargos.    It  appears  doubtful  that 
crewmembers exercised the valves prior to their cargo operations as per their operating procedure.   
 
As  a  result  of  this  casualty  and  others  involving  similar  circumstances,  the  Coast  Guard  strongly 
recommends to vessel Owner / Operators, Crewmembers, Classification Society Inspectors, Vetting, 
and  other  inspection  personal  ensure  that  tank  high  velocity  vent  valves  and  vacuum  valves,  or 
combination  pressure  /  vacuum  valves    are  maintained  in  operating  conditions  at  all  times  and  are 
routinely checked as procedures require. 
 
This safety alert is for informational purposes only and does not relieve any domestic or international safety, operational or material requirement.  Developed and distributed 
U.S. C.G. Headquarters Office of Investigations and Analysis, Washington, DC.  Questions may be addressed to HQS-PF-fldr-G-PCA@uscg.mil.    
 Office of Investigations and Analysis:  http://marineinvestigations.us     To subscribe: kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil 
 

