February 15, 2018 
Washington, DC 

Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 Safety Alert 2-18 
 

 

Operational Risk Management and Planning is 

 Essential to Safe Towing and Salvage Operations 

Figure 1: Salvage operations successfully recovered the vessel 

 
 
This  safety  alert  reminds  commercial  towing  and 
salvage  operators  to  assess  operational  risks  at  all 
times  and  continually  reassess  risks  based  on 
weather,  equipment,  experience,  and  evolving 
conditions  on-scene.    It  further  reminds  all  those  on 
the  water  to  use  appropriate  Personal  Protective 
Equipment  (PPE)  for  prevailing  weather  conditions.  
Recently,  a  commercial 
towboat  Captain  got 
underway for a nighttime, 10 to 12 hour, dock-to-dock tow during a period when the State had declared a 
State of Emergency for an approaching winter storm and the National Weather Service had issued a Winter 
Storm Warning and Gale Warning for the entire coastal region.  Ultimately, the Captain perished at sea after 
misinterpreting environmental factors that should have indicated the extraordinary operational risks involved 
and compelled a different course of action.  
 
Prior  to  the  tow’s  departure,  the  towed  vessel  was  in  stable  condition  at  its  moored  location  with  no 
imminent  threat or change in condition to compel a towing operation.   However,  the towboat Captain and 
company  management  decided  to  conduct  the  tow  based  on  observed  stable  weather  conditions  and  an 
assessment  that  the  tow  could  be  completed  before  the  onset  of  heavy  weather.    They  further  assessed 
that  the  protected  route,  comprised  of  inland  waterways,  would  minimize  the  impact  of  any  weather 
encountered.  The Captain was the sole operator aboard the towboat and a hired deckhand was onboard 
the towed vessel monitoring its status.  
 
Around  6:00  PM,  the  towboat  hooked  up  to  its  tow 
and got underway.  Within a few hours, the weather 
conditions  deteriorated  to  near  white  out  conditions 
with  a  visibility  of  less  than  a  quarter  mile.    The  air 
temperature  was  approximately  28  degrees 
Fahrenheit  (F),  water  temperature  was  about  39 
degrees  F,  and  sustained  winds  were  from  the  NW 
at roughly 20-30 knots with periodic gust to 35 knots. 
The  21-foot  towing  vessel  subsequently  capsized 
due  to  heavy  seas  and  wind  at  about  1:30  AM  the 
next  morning.    The  deckhand  onboard  the  towed 
vessel saw the Captain enter the water but lost sight 
of  him  due  to  darkness,  the  sea  state,  and  blizzard 
conditions.  Despite exhaustive Coast Guard search 
and  rescue  efforts, 
the  Captain  could  not  be 
immediately  located.    He  was  found  deceased  two 
days later and was not wearing a personal floatation 
device (PFD).   
 

Figure 2: Recovered inflatable Type V PFDs from the sunken 
towing vessel 

Safety Alert 2-18 

 
Investigators  determined  the  towing  company’s  preferred  PPE  for  use  by  their  Captains  were  Adult 
Universal  Inflatable  CO2  activated  Type-V  PFDs.    In  the  cabin  of  the  salvaged  vessel  were  five  Type  V 
PFDs found in varying states of inflation due to submersion.  A well-known manufacturer produced all of the 
PFDs, some as recently as 2017, and each had their proper Coast Guard approval numbers.  One PFD was 
fully inflated, three were partially inflated and one was uninflated as shown in Figure 2.  Each PFD had a 
label  sewn  on  it  with  the  notation  “DO  NOT  USE 
BELOW  FREEZING  REFER  TO  OWNER’S  MANUAL 
FOR MORE INFORMATION” as shown in Figure 3.  The 
owner’s manual for the PFDs had specific instructions for 
what  to  do  in  below-freezing  temperatures.    It  called  for 
partial pre-inflation and / or topping off after auto-inflation 
by  using  the  oral  inflator.      It  also  suggested  the  use  of 
other  types  of  PFDs  when  operating  in  cooler  water  to 
delay the onset of hypothermia. 
 
As a result of this casualty,  the Coast Guard strongly  recommends  the following to commercial salvors, 
towboat operators, and others who work on the water:   
 
HEED INCLEMENT WEATHER WARNINGS 

Figure 3: Manufacturer's warning on Type V PFD 

•  Obtain and monitor weather forecasts and marine weather forecasts for your area of operations.   
•  Evaluate the need to get underway in forecasted hazardous weather.  
•  Consider  safe  havens  and  contingency  plans  along  your  route  should  hazardous  weather  arrive 

•  Delay tows or salvage operations as necessary to prevent putting yourself at risk.   

unexpectedly. 

 
WEAR YOUR LIFEJACKET 

•  Obtain the best PFD suited for your operation and environment. 
•  Read the PFD manual and equipment labels.  
•  Follow all instructions including PFD maintenance and inspection recommendations. 
•  For cold water operations consider using an approved flotation coat or deck-suit style PFD. 

 
TOWING  AND  SALVAGE  ORGANIZATIONS  should  implement  policies,  procedures,  and  training  to 
address  the  issues  identified  in  this  alert  including  proper  PFD  selection  and  usage.    Furthermore,  risk 
management tools and decision-making criteria should be adopted and exercised to safeguard operations. 
 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purposes  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.    Developed  by  Investigations  Division  of  Coast 
Guard Sector Wilmington North Carolina.  Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis, 
Washington DC.  Questions may be sent to HQS-PF-fldr-CG-INV@uscg.mil . 
 

 

2 

