 

 

September 25, 2017 
Washington, DC                         

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

 

 
 Safety Alert 09-17 

It’s only right to expect the light to improve your plight on a dark night. 

Leaky Lifejacket Lights  

 
The  Coast  Guard  has  recently  received  a  safety  bulletin  from  Cruise  Lines  International  Association  that 
reported  problems  with  lifejacket  lights.    The  bulletin  relates  to  Alcares  water  activated  flashing  lifejacket 
lights  models  Jack  A1-ALK  and  Jack  ARH-ALK  (CG  approval  numbers  161.112/88  and  161.112/90).    To 
date, inspections have discovered over 3,000 non-operational lights.  All of the faulty lights discovered had 
leaky batteries (Figure 2), and some were identified as having incorrect battery expiration labels.  All of the 
faulty lights were found to be non-operational before their expiration date.  Contact Alcares for questions or 
concerns,  including  determining  if  non-operational  lights  are  under  warranty  for  a  battery  replacement. 
Phone: +45 47 19 00 00; Email: alcares@alcares.dk; Website: http://alcares.dk/leaking-batteries-found/.   
 
The Coast Guard recommends that lifejackets with lights, especially those with automatic lights, be stored in 
temperature  and  humidity  controlled,  water-tight  environments.    Visual  inspections  and  tests  must  be 
conducted  in  accordance  with  vessel  carriage  requirements  and  manufacturer  manuals.    Vessel 
owners/operators  should  check  their  lifejacket  lights  to  verify  that  they  are  operational  at  the  nearest 
opportunity.  
 
This  safety  alert  was  developed  by  the  Coast  Guard  Office  of  Design  and  Engineering  Standards.  Any 
questions, comments, or incidences of failed lights under these or other Certificates of Approval should be 
sent to: Stephanie.M.Groleau@uscg.mil. 
 
 

                      Figure 1: General Leakage Example              
                               (Not an Alcares Product) 

     Figure 2: Alcares Products Example 

 

 

 

