  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 14, 2002 (reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

MAINTAINIING READINESS 

      Safety Alert 12-02 
 

The following information is a product of the Seventeenth Coast Guard District's Fishing Vessel 
Safety Program. The lessons learned related to this alert may be applicable to other segments of 
maritime industry.  

The Incident:  Three men had been long lining for halibut in the Aleutians and were transiting to 
Dutch Harbor when their engine died. For the 44 foot vessel, the weather conditions were not ideal 
- 35 knot winds and 18 foot seas, nor was the location - just a mile from Cape Cheerful, where the 
rocky cliffs offered no soft protected place to land.  

A MAYDAY was broadcast. While waiting for help to arrive, they put out their anchor in an effort to 
"catch on" to something, but it soon became clear that the deteriorating sea conditions were going 
to prevent that from happening. The crew then deployed their survival craft, placing 2 of the 3 
immersion suits inside along with the visual distress signals, and tied it off to the vessel. Suddenly 
the line to the survival craft broke and it drifted away, along with their survival equipment. As the 
fishing vessel continued to drift toward the rocks two of the crew donned wet suits and the third 
donned his immersion suit. Finally a decision was made to abandon the vessel and risk a beach 
landing in the 18 foot breaking seas just three minutes before their boat was picked up by a wave 
and smashed on the rocks.  

Several fishing vessels heard the distress calls on the radio and responded to the situation, some 
even getting underway from piers in Dutch Harbor. Unfortunately, the responding vessels were 
unable to get in close enough to pass a towline to the stricken vessel. Given the weather 
conditions there was little the fishing vessels could do except wait. Once it became apparent that 
the crew of the distressed boat had abandoned ship into the water, the master of a 151-foot 
crabber that had just arrived on scene decided he couldn't wait any longer. He steamed in to the 
edge of the breaking surf, locating and rescuing the three survivors out of the breakers and 
transported them to Dutch Harbor. 

Lessons Learned:  There are "Ready for Sea" safety factors that are relevant to this incident and 
several "lessons learned." 

•  Conduct periodic engine maintenance. Be sure your engine is in top condition before you 

•  Conduct drills as if there were an actual emergency. Establish procedures for abandoning 

leave the dock.  

ship before something happens.  

•  Don immersion suits early. Although they are cumbersome, you can still work in them and if 

• 

you end up in the water, your chances of surviving are dramatically increased.  
If immersion suits aren't available, wear whatever is on hand that will insulate you best in 
cold water. The wetsuits that two of the survivors donned prior to entering the water are a 

1 

primary reason why they survived 20 minutes of swimming in the cold waters of the Bering 
Sea. Even rain gear will reduce the loss of body warmth due to cold water circulation when 
compared to regular street clothes.  

•  Launch the survival craft only when you are ready to board the craft. Once it has been 

• 

inflated it is exposed to the elements. Keep survival equipment close at hand and ready to 
use if you need it.  
If you do have to go into the water, hold on to each other so that you make a bigger, more 
visible target for search and rescue units. You'll also have someone to talk to, which keeps 
morale higher.  

Questions regarding this incident may be addressed to Ms. Sue Jorgensen at 
sjorgensen@cgalaska.uscg.mil.  

 
This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international safety, operational or material requirement. Developed by the Office of Investigations 
and Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil.  

 

2 

