  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 6, 2002 (estimate / reformatted 2014) 
Washington, DC 
 

         Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

      Safety Alert 04-02 
 

UNDERWAY AND NO LOOKOUT 

It was one of those days in Southeast Alaska when boaters rush to the water to enjoy the splendor 
of the day. The weather was calm and the visibility was excellent. Two men were anchored off The 
Sisters Island near Hoonah in their 21-foot vessel, fishing for halibut. One of them looked up and 
saw a fishing vessel headed directly toward them. Startled, he looked again, and couldn't see signs 
of anyone in the pilothouse or anywhere on the vessel. He asked his fishing partner and they 
agreed there was no one in sight. The fishing vessel was still headed directly toward them. The 
fishing vessel's name could easily be read, so they tried to contact the vessel on the VHF radio to 
request they alter their course. No one answered the calls and the vessel's course remained 
steady, despite repeated urgent calls. The boaters decided their best course of action would be to 
immediately start the motor and swing on the anchor to avoid a collision. They were able to move 
their stern out of the way just as the fishing vessel motored by. As the fishing vessel passed, the 
crew on the stern could be seen baiting hooks and waving at them, completely oblivious to the 
narrow escape they had just had.  

There are "Ready for Sea" safety factors that are relevant to this incident and several "lessons 
learned".  

•  All vessels must maintain a proper lookout at all times. You may think you can see an 

approaching vessel because there are three of you working gear on the stern, but that isn't 
possible. A proper lookout means there is someone looking where the vessel is traveling at 
all times. This is especially critical when transiting heavy traffic zones or where recreational 
vessels usually anchor. In addition, a lookout while at anchor can save your vessel, as it did 
in this situation and possibly your life. 

•  Maintain a constant radio watch. Keep the radio turned on. Keep the volume high enough to 
hear any calls. If working on deck, mount a speaker outside where you can hear radio calls. 
It just might save your life, or that of others. 

•  Be prepared to warn an approaching vessel of your presence. Don't rely exclusively on 
radio communications. Always be ready to sound an air horn or flash a light-anything to 
draw attention. 

•  The anchored vessel did the right thing by moving out of the path of the fishing vessel. 

Never "assume" the other vessel will change course. Be prepared to take evasive action to 
prevent a collision. Remember the obligation of ALL mariners at ALL times is to take 
appropriate action to avoid a collision. 

This  safety  alert  is  provided  for  informational  purpose  only  and  does  not  relieve  any  domestic  or 
international  safety,  operational  or  material  requirement.  Developed  by  the  Office  of  Investigations  and 
Casualty Analysis. For questions or concerns please email hqs-pf-fldr-cg-inv@uscg.mil. 

1 

