 

 

 
 
 
 
August 30, 2013 
Washington, DC 

            Inspections and Compliance Directorate 

           

 

 

 

 

 

 

                        Alert  09-13 

BRIDGE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN PILOTAGE WATERS 

This Safety Alert serves as a reminder to the maritime community that navigation watch teams should 
at all times use Bridge Resource Management (BRM) best practices and techniques even when the 
ship is being directed by a properly licensed pilot. 
 
What is Bridge Resource Management? 
BRM  is  the  effective  management  and  utilization  of  all  available  resources,  both  human  and 
electronic, by the navigation watch team to ensure the safe navigation of the vessel.  The essence of 
BRM is a safety culture and management approach that facilitates communication, cooperation, and 
coordination  among  the  individuals  involved  in  a  ship’s  navigation.    BRM  is  required  by  the 
International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers.   
 
Recent Case Highlights BRM Failure in Pilotage Waters 
A  recent  marine  casualty  investigation  of  a  bridge  allision  involving  a  deep  draft  tank  ship  revealed 
the local pilot was navigating the vessel in highly reduced visibility conditions without any substantive 
navigation assistance or input from the vessel’s bridge watch team.  The pilot and both watch officers 
on the vessel’s bridge had taken a BRM course within the last five years.  The pilot’s course was a 
“BRM-P”  course  (i.e.,  a  BRM  course  designed  and  approved  to  focus  on  the  functions,  tasks, 
experiences,  and  needs  of  compulsory  pilots).    The  vessel’s  operating  company  had  policy  and 
procedures  in  place  requiring  crews  to  utilize  BRM  yet  communications  between  the  crew  and  the 
pilot were lacking. 
 
 
Effective BRM Requires Proactive Action by Owner/Operator, Master and Pilot 
Masters are reminded they are ultimately responsible for the bridge watch team’s conduct and safe 
navigation.    This  includes  maintaining  discipline  in  promoting  teamwork  and  information  exchange, 
especially when cultural or language barriers may exist between the pilot and the vessel’s crew.  The 
presence of a properly licensed pilot does not relieve a vessel’s bridge team of its responsibilities for 
safe navigation.   
 
The Coast Guard strongly recommends all vessel owners, operators, and masters ensure effective 
BRM is being utilized aboard their vessels, and that mechanisms exist to ensure that a cooperative, 
mutually-supportive  working  relationship  is  developed  between  the  bridge  team  and  the  pilot  in 
recognition of their respective responsibilities for safe navigation.  Vessel operators are encouraged 
to  utilize  a  robust  audit  program  to  frequently  monitor  and  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  BRM 
principles are being practiced.  The Coast Guard also recommends vessel pilots employ appropriate 
mechanisms to facilitate effective BRM to the maximum extent possible, including a thorough Master-
Pilot  exchange,  and  effective  communication  and  collaboration  while  navigating,  particularly  during 
periods of restricted visibility, maneuvering, or heavy traffic.  
 
This Safety Alert is provided for informational purposes and does not relieve any foreign or domestic 
requirement.  Developed by the Coast Guard Sector San Francisco.  Questions may be addressed to 
LT. Jon Lane; Jon.D.Lane@uscg.mil. 
Distributed by the Office of Investigations and Casualty Analysis:  http://Marineinvestigations.us 
To subscribe:kenneth.w.olsen@uscg.mil                                                                                                                                                                    

