Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
ALERT 08 – 03  
 

CRANE RIG UP RESULTS IN FALL FROM HEIGHT 

 

 

 
WHAT HAPPENED: 
 
The rig crews were rigging up a tall pedestal crane on an offshore production 
platform  as  the  first  phase  of  the  drilling  package  rig–up  process.    The  heel 
section of the boom was secured and pinned and the next task was to install 
a hydraulic cylinder, which is used to raise and lower the boom.  The Driller 
and  Derrickman  had  successfully  removed  the  transport-securing  pin  and 
were  lowering  the  cylinder  in  place  on  the  turntable  clevis  with  assistance 
from  another  crane.      At  this  point  the  cylinder  slipped  in  its  rigging  and  fell 
onto a handrail, which protected the pedestal walk around.  The handrail was 
broken from its base and fell 18 feet (5.4 meters) to the deck, taking with it the 
Derrickman  who  was  tied  onto  it  by  his  fall  protection  lanyard.    The  injured 
received skull fractures and a broken right arm. 
 
WHAT CAUSED IT: 
 
The rigging was not properly applied.  Past work practice has dictated the procedure for rigging up 
the  cylinder  with  a  second  crane,  and  rigging  that  was  simply  slung  underneath  to  support  the 
cylinder to ease the positioning of the cylinder into the turntable support clevis.  As the cylinder was 
lowered into position, it increased the angle exposed to the slings, causing the slings to slip upward 
on the cylinder, allowing it to fall.   

The Derrickman had tied off his fall protection lanyard to a handrail that was enclosing the pedestal walk-
around.  Handrails surrounded the platform walk-around, so there was no need for the Derrickman to tie off.  
 
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:  To address this incident, this company instructed rig supervisors and 
personnel in the following: 
 
Just because “We have always done it this way” does not mean that the hazard is not present.  We all need 
to take a step back and review our actions and practices upon the completion of each job and ask; “What 
went right, what went wrong, what could we have done different?” 
 
Perform  JSA’s  on  each  task  in  a  job  -  not  the  whole  job.    Clearly  the  installation  of  the  boom  heel 
section  and  then  the  cylinder  are  two  tasks  in  the  job  of  installing  the  crane.    After  the  job  is 
complete, capture lessons learned during the review of JSA and up-date the JSA on file as needed. 

 
Rig  supervisors:   Immediately  audit  fall  protection  training  on  your  rig.    Spend  an  equal  amount  of 
time talking about tie-off points as you do on wear and care of the harness.  Identify individual tie-off 
points for your lanyards.  Provide and clearly mark tie-off points around the rig.  A handrail is not an 
appropriate  tie  off  point  for  fall  protection,  as  it  is  designed  to  withstand  only  200  pounds  of  side 
loading, where as an appropriate fall protection tie off point is required to withstand 5000 pounds of 
dynamic loading. 

When rigging loads, use only API recommended hitching techniques.  Improvised slinging will not be 
a part of our work practice. 

 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2008 

Safety Alert 

        From the International Association of Drilling Contractors 

 
Most  importantly  take  the  time  to  visualize  the  work  to  be  done  and  identify  the  potential  hazards, 
and  communicate  them,  so  a  control  can  be  implemented.    Think  beyond  the  evident,  adopt  a 
questioning attitude: “What If?”  Remember: 

Step 1: Identify the Hazard  

Step 2: Assess the Risk  

Step 3: Identify Controls  

Step 4: Implement Controls  

Step 5 Monitor the Process. 

The above 5 steps are a simple and effective tool for all of us to use, whether crossing a busy street or 
installing a crane. 

 

 

The Corrective Actions stated in this alert are one company’s attempts to address the incident,  

and do not necessarily reflect the position of IADC or the IADC HSE Committee. 

This material is presented for information purposes only.  Managers & Supervisors should 

evaluate this information to determine if it can be applied to their own situations and practices 

Copyright © 2008 International Association of Drilling Contractors All rights reserved. 

Issued January 2008 

