Safety Alert 54

January 2013

Scaffolding Safety

What Happened?
A scaffolder was dismantling a scaffold structure outboard of an offshore platform at a height of
approximately 15 metres above the sea when a vertical scaffolding tube (a ‘dropper’) that was supporting him 
began to slowly slip.  The tube was fixed in place with standard scaffold couplers and the tube was being 
pulled through these under the weight of the scaffolder.
The scaffolder alerted other workers in the vicinity but they could not reach the connection in time to tighten 
the coupler.  The tube continued to slip through the coupler until the scaffolder fell. Fortunately, the inertia 
reel harness he was wearing arrested his fall.  The scaffolder managed to keep hold of the dropper so that it 
did not fall into the sea, and was suspended over water for approximately seven minutes.  A hook from a 
rescue winch was swung over to the scaffolder, who attached it to the fall arrest harness, to allow the 
scaffolder to be pulled up to the platform’s walkway.
The investigation found that the scaffolding coupler holding the dropper in place was loose and that there was 
no check coupler fitted above the dropper tube.  It was also found that the rescue equipment used was not 
suitably rated for the weight of the scaffolder and the associated scaffolding. In addition, some of the 
certification for the equipment being used during the rescue activities was found to be out of date.
During a subsequent inspection of the facility, a number of fall-protection devices were observed anchored to 
the bases of hand rail stanchions.  The relevant standard on industrial fall-arrest systems and devices (AS/NZS
1891 series) specifies a minimum 15kN capacity for anchor points and it is considered poor practice in the 
wider industry to use hand rails or stanchions as anchor points.

What could go wrong?
If not for the inertia reel harness arresting the scaffolder’s fall, the scaffolder could have fallen several metres 
to the sea along with other dropped objects, potentially leading to death or serious injury. In addition, 
deficiencies in equipment rating, certification and regular inspection could have contributed to further failures 
during rescue activities.

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

1 of 2

Safety Alert 54

Scaffolding Safety

Key lessons



It is considered good practice to install check couplers above the suspension scaffolding coupler as
described in AS/NZS 4576 Guidelines for scaffolding.
The scaffold should be visually inspected by the work party prior to using the scaffold.
Scaffolds should be inspected regularly by a competent person.



 Only equipment within its certification period should be used.




Safety equipment should be suitably rated for the personnel using it.
Fall arrest equipment should be anchored at a suitably rated anchor point.
The rescue plan should reflect the hazards the job presents rather than using a generic rescue plan for 
all scaffold jobs.

The legislation
As per Clause 9 of Schedule 3 to the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006: “Operators 
have a duty of care to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the facility is safe and without risk to 
the health of any person at or near the facility.”  This includes an obligation to take all reasonably practicable 
steps to:





Ensure that any equipment (including equipment to be used in emergencies) is safe [Clause 9(2)(c)];
and:
Implement and maintain appropriate procedures and equipment for the control of, and response to, 
emergencies at the facility.

Contact

For further information email alerts@nopsema.gov.au and quote Alert 54.

National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority

2 of 2

