www.aiche.org/ccps

http://www.aiche.org/CCPS/Publications/Beacon/index.aspx

Messages for Manufacturing Personnel

www.iomosaic.com

Critical safeguards must be kept functional!

February 2019

This issue sponsored by

In 1999, a partial power outage (in this case an electrical failure 
without loss of steam pressure) led to a catastrophic overpressure in 
several pressure vessels in an alumina slurry digestion/flash system. 
It caused a vessel to rupture in a Boiling Liquid Expanding Vapor 
Explosion (BLEVE). The shockwave and the released hot caustic 
liquid injured 29 people – several permanently. Damage was in the 
tens of millions of dollars. Fortunately there were no fatalities. 

The plant had been designed with several layers of protection, but on 
the day of the accident several were not working:

1. The pressure control system was in manual mode so the operator 
could apply additional pressure to push the slurry through before 
it could solidify. 

2. The high pressure interlock was in bypass mode to give the 

operator additional flexibility by going above design pressure.

Aftermath of the BLEVE

3. The pressure relief valves had been disabled because they had 

ID No. 16-00352

Reference:  MSHA Report of incident on July 5, 1999 MSHA 

been leaking after previous openings.

The site was in the habit of bypassing/disabling the safeguards to maintain production. They rationalized this because 
their process had a tendency to solidify if it wasn’t kept moving (by steam pressure). When a partial power trip occurred 
the system pressure increased. However, since the pressure interlock was Bypassed and too many relief  valves were 
disabled, the pressure built up to unsafe levels.. 

Operate equipment within its limits all the time – with all safeguards in place. This is so important that the CCPS made it 
one of the 20 elements of its risk-based process safety program (Conduct of Operations).

Did you know?

 High pressure shutdown systems or other safety-related protections 

should never be bypassed without following standard operating 
procedures (for example, if a safety system must be disabled during 
a normal startup) or using temporary Management of Change 
(MOC) systems. Temporary MOCs may be used to manage 
bypasses for a short time while something is repaired, as long as you 
take other temporary measures to ensure you aren’t increasing risk. 

 It’s not unusual for relief valves to fail to reseat completely after 

they have done their critically important job once.

 Closing the block valve under a relief device is a potentially 

significant risk increase and should only be considered after careful 
evaluation of all mitigation options. Typical “safety system 
impairment standards” require following administrative measures 
like tagging, logging and communication to facility management.

 Your safeguard systems are typically intended to be challenged by a 
real ”process demand” less than once per year. If a safety system is 
being activated more often than that there may be a problem with 
your process design. 

What can you do?

 Understand the major hazards at your plant.
 Know the critical safeguards against those 

hazards and be sure they are working 
properly.

 If you regularly have to operate with 

critical safeguards bypassed or impaired, 
report this to management.

 Do not place automatic controls in manual, 

do not bypass interlocks nor disable relief 
valves.

 If there is no other choice while something 

is being repaired, use Temporary MOC 
procedures to manage disabling/impairing 
of safety systems for a short time, with all 
affected persons made aware of this.

 Make sure that unreliable controls and 

safeguards are considered in Process 
Hazards Analysis reviews.

Your safety is built in layers. Make sure they are working!

©AIChE 2019. All rights reserved. Reproduction for non-commercial, educational purposes is encouraged. However, reproduction for any 
commercial purpose without express written consent of AIChE is strictly prohibited. Contact us at ccps_beacon@aiche.org or 646-495-1371.

The Beacon is usually available in Afrikaans, Arabic, Catalan, Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian,  

Italian, Japanese, Korean, Malay, Marathi, Mongolian, Persian (Farsi), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Urdu, and Vietnamese.

